Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
My uploads
My loans
My favorites
My lists
My collections
My web archives
Account settings
Get help
Log out
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer People
Full text of "The Concise Story of the Dover Patrol [1932]"
See other formats
This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 


Google books 


https://books.google.com 


4 


Digitized by Google 


The Concise Story of the Dover Patrol 


Digitized by Google 


T he Concise Story of the 
Dover Patrol 


By - a 
Admiral Sir R. H. Bacon 


K.C.B., K.C.V.O., D.S.O. 


Foreword by 
Admiral of the Fleet 


Earl Jellicoe, 6.c.B., 0M. G.C¥.O. 


With 25 Illustrations and Charts and 12 Diagrams 


London 
HUTCHINSON & CO. (Publishers) LTD. 


Printed in Great Britain at 


The Mayflower Press, Plymouth. 
1932 


William Brendon & Son, Ltd. 


PEO T! =JseT7 


TO 
MY OLD COMRADES 
OF THE 


DOVER PATROL 


Digitized by Google 


PREFACE 


N the following pages my previous account of the work of the Dover 
I Patrol, 1915-17, has been brought up to date and condensed into a 
single volume. I have been urged to do this for three reasons. 

First, the previous edition has been out of print for several years. 

Secondly, I was anxious that the price of the present volume should 
be sufficiently reduced to allow any who served in the Dover Patrol to 
purchase a copy, as a memento of their work, without undue strain on 
their purses. 

Thirdly, the inaccuracies and omissions of the Admiralty Departmental 
account of the work of the Patrol during my command, and in The Official 
History of the War at Sea, Volume V, as well as those of self-constituted, 
worthy, but ill-informed critics, need controverting by drawing attention 
to the true history of that period. 

It would appear to most people reasonable that before the publication of 
official accounts of the happenings in any Naval theatre of war, proofs of 
the works should be sent to the Admiral then commanding, so that he 
might correct inaccuracies and explain any point on which doubt might 
exist. This has been wisely done by the editor of the Official History of 
the Atr Force during the War. In fact, the only excuse for writing an 
Official History at this time is that most of the officers in command are 
yet alive, and therefore the valuable information stored in their brains 
can be placed at the disposal of the historian. In the two official documents 
above quoted, this, at all events in my case, has not been done. Therefore 
the need for this volume. 

It would undoubtedly interest many to learn from the heads of the 
departments concerned, why so obviously sensible a procedure has not 
been adopted in the above two publications. 

In addition to those who so kindly helped me to produce my former 
book on the Dover Patrol, my thanks are due to Mr. Maurice Prendergast 
and Mr. R. HM. Gibson, for the information with which they have so 


kindly supplied me. 
R. H. Bacon. 


‘‘ But, in truth, that which in the last instance kept 
the German forces from breaking disastrously on any dark 
night into the Channel and jeopardising the very founda- 
tion of our resisting power, were not the wonderfully 
planned and executed defences of nets and mines but the 
indomitable hearts of the men of the Dover Patrol.”’ 


JOSEPH CONRAD. 


FOREWORD 


By ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET EARL JELLICOE, G.C.B., O.M., G.C.V.O. 


IR REGINALD BACON gives, in his preface to this book, the 
S reasons for its production. 

He has compressed into this single volume the main features of 
his earlier work, and has incorporated into it much new matter of interest. 

Unquestionably the work of the Dover Patrol during the War was of 
the very utmost importance to the Allied Cause. 

As is so clearly pointed out in the pages which follow, it involved 
safeguarding the passage of our troops, munitions, and stores across the 
Channel, and protecting the ships of the Mercantile Marine which, to 
the average number of one hundred, passed Dover daily, carrying food, 
etc., to the Thames and ports on our East Coast, traffic with which it 
would have been impossible for our railways to deal had the Channel 
been closed to our ships by enemy vessels or mines, and the goods landed 
alternatively in western ports. 

The Patrol had the additional task of co-operating with the left flank 
of the Army in Flanders. 

Important as was the work of the Patrol in the early stages of the War 
when German vessels had no base nearer than the Ems, its importance 
became immensely magnified when the enemy by their occupation of the 
Belgian coast became possessed of bases available for destroyers and 
submarines at Zeebrugge and Ostend, bases within 72 and 62 miles 
respectively of Dover, or within two hours’ steaming in a destroyer. 

The German destroyer force on the Belgian coast, having always the 
initiative besides being far stronger than the destroyers of the Dover 
Patrol, could be certain of being immensely superior in force in an attack 
on any portion of our necessarily scattered patrol line, and it was a stand- 
ing wonder that so little advantage was taken of this fact by enemy forces 
raiding the cross-Channel traffic or attacking the vessels at anchor in 
the Downs. 

As Sir Reginald points out, our destroyer force at Dover was never, 
owing to the general shortage of destroyers in the Fleet, adequate for the 
work which it would be called upon to carry out in the face of an enter- 
prising enemy, and this fact alone added immensely to the anxieties and 
responsibilities of the Admiral commanding the Patrol. 

Readers of this book will realise the wide range of the work of the 
Patrol, the masterly manner in which Admiral Bacon planned the various 
‘operations carried out on the Belgian coast, and the striking inventive 
genius in regard to detail which characterised those operations. Perhaps 
the climax was reached in the planning of, and preparation for, the landing 
in 1917 of 14,000 men with tanks and artillery on the Belgian coast in the 
face of strong German batteries. This landing could not, unfortunately, 


9 


10 FOREWORD 


be carried out owing to the advance of the Army on Roulers being held 
up by abnormally bad weather. The climax of audacity was undoubtedly 
the institution of the Belgian coast patrol. 

Admiral Bacon gives, in the last chapter of the book, the reasons which 
led him to inaugurate this patrol and its effects on enemy operations. 

It will be noted in this connection that the claim advanced in Admiral 
Bacon’s earlier book, to the effect that the Belgian coast patrol was instru- 
mental in stopping mine-laying by German submarines in the Channel, 
is now corrected from information obtained since the War ended. But 
the patrol had many other valuable uses. 

A very important part of the work of the Dover Patrol was the denial 
of the passage of the Straits of Dover to enemy submarines. The book 
describes clearly the various devices by which attempts were made to 
prevent submarines from passing down Channel, or from laying mine- 
fields to endanger traffic. Mention is made of the immense efforts to 
produce a satisfactory obstruction and of the work involved in laying and 
maintaining, first, the Admiralty barrage of 1914-15, and secondly the 
net barrage of 1916. The work was stupendous and reflected the greatest 
possible credit on the splendid seamen manning the drifters and those 
who commanded them. | 

It was recognised by Admiral Bacon in 1917 that the net barrage was 
not effective in denying the passage to submarines, although it had its 
uses and caused the enemy considerable loss, as described in Chapter IX. 

Therefore in February 1917 he placed before me the plans of a ladder 
mine-field barrage to be laid between Folkestone and Gris-Nez. At this 
date we had only just succeeded in producing a mine that was satisfactory 
against submarines, and supplies could not be obtained until some months 
had elapsed. As soon as supplies were in sight Admiral Bacon completed 
his plans for the mine-field, which included the use of lightships to 
assist in forcing submarines to dive into the mine-field. 

A perusal of Chapter IX will show that the statement to the contrary 
in Volume V of Naval Operations is incorrect. 

Admiral Bacon mentions also in Chapter IX the work of the Barrage 
Committee at the Admiralty appointed by Sir Eric Geddes, and points 
out how the existence of that Committee delayed important work in 
connection with the new barrage. Perhaps the best example of the 
impossibility of some of the proposals of the Committee is that given on 
page 161 in regard to placing the control, etc., of the barrage under an 
officer responsible only to the Admiralty. Such a recommendation can 
only be described as ludicrous. 

Admiral Bacon refers to another subject on which there was disagree- 
ment between the Committee and himself, viz. the position which the 
patrol of the barrage should occupy and its strength. He gives on pages 
163-166 his very good reasons for his own suggested policy, and I had 
at the time, not the slightest hesitation in agreeing with him and in refusing 
to interfere with his arrangements for the disposition of the patrol. My 
reason was plain, viz. that Admiral Bacon possessed nearly three years’ 


FOREWORD II 


experience of work in the Straits of Dover, and the Committee’s know- 
ledge of the case was confined to visits to Dover and a study of the matter 
at the Admiralty. 

The result, as recorded in Chapter IX, proved the entire correctness 
of Admiral Bacon’s views. 

It was of course the existence of Admiral Bacon’s ladder mine-field 
with its patrol which led to the destruction of twelve German submarines 
during December 1917 and the year 1918, and to the partial closing of the 
Straits of Dover to vessels of this type. As so often happens, the credit 
for this success was given to the Admiral’s successor instead of to him. 
It is obviously not possible now to say whether the German losses would 
have been heavier had Admiral Bacon’s intentions been fully carried out. 

The two final operations carried out by the vessels of the Dover Patrol 
were the attack on the Mole at Zeebrugge, combined with a blocking 
operation, and the attempted blocking of Ostend. As mentioned in 
Chapter XII, operations of this nature had frequently been under con- 
sideration ever since 1915, but for reasons given it had not been considered 
desirable to carry them out. 

Towards the close of 1917, however, these reasons no longer existed, and 
plans were prepared by Admiral Bacon for their execution. In preparing 
these plans he had the great advantage of three years’ experience of the 
general conditions and weather in the Straits and on the Belgian Coast, 
and also, during this time, the opportunity of gauging the war mentality of 
the German naval command in Belgium. His original plan for the attack 
on Zeebrugge did not include any attempt at a blocking operation, but 
did include a design for destroying the lock gates by gun-fire from a 
monitor at short range. At my instigation, however, arrangements were 
included in the plan for blocking the cana] entrance, although it was 
pointed out by Admiral Bacon that blocking could not cause more than 
temporary inconvenience to the exit of destroyers and submarines. 

In Chapter XII full details are given of the operation, as proposed by 
Admiral Bacon, and the departure from these plans made by his successor 
is discussed. 

As in the case already mentioned of the difference in procedure adopted 
in the patrol of the Dover barrage, it is not possible for any one to decide 
now to what extent departure from the original plan for the attack on 
Zeebrugge was responsible for the failure to seize and sink the German 
destroyers lying alongside the Mole (which was an integral part of the 
original plan) and for the very heavy losses incurred in this most gallant effort. 

As regards results, Admiral Bacon’s forecast concerning the impossi- 
bility of effectually blocking the canal entrance was fully justified, for as 
mentioned in Volume V of Naval Operations submarine UB 16 went to sea 
past the blockships two days after the blocking operation had been carried 
out, and after April 27th (two days later) the average number of sailings and 
arrivals that took place before the blockships were sunk, was maintained. 

The two very gallant attempts to block Ostend were equally unsuccess- 
ful. In the case of the first attempt it does appear that more attention 


12 FOREWORD 


to detail was needed in the planning of the operation. Whatever views, 
however, may be held as to details of the plan of the Zeebrugge and Ostend 
operations, and of their resultant value, there can be no question about 
the immense admiration which will ever be felt for the magnificent spirit 
and gallantry with which they were carried out. It will always be a source . 
of great pride to the Royal Navy, the Royal Naval Reserve, Merchant Navy 
and Fishing Fleet, and the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve that they were 
given the opportunity, and took st, of showing the world what could be 
achieved by British seamen. One cannot, however, but regret that the 
Admiralty should have seen fit to issue such an entirely inaccurate com- 
muniqué as to the result of the blocking operations at Ostend, when 
Admiral Keyes had actually reported that the Vindictive was blocking 
only a third of the fairway. 

It is perhaps but natural that during war, and indeed subsequently too, 
the attention and interest of the general public should be centred mainly 
on the more striking episodes, usually those in which fighting occurs, 
to the exclusion of the necessary and invaluable heavy collar work which 
during the years of war has been performed by officers and men who 
perhaps have not had the excitement and interest of actual combat with 
the enemy, however frequent the chances of such combat may have been. 

It is all the more essential that those who write of war should be careful 
to give honour where honour is due, and Admiral Bacon in this highly 
interesting volume has thoroughly carried out this principle. 

He brings to light most effectually the invaluable and very onerous 
work of the Sixth Destroyer Flotilla and other destroyers which from time 
to time joined his command. He describes fully the work of the monitors 
which did come into frequent contact with the enemy, but with results 
which could rarely be observed by those on board. He gives a striking 
picture of the unending work of those gallant fishermen who laboured 
day after day and year after year to keep the anti-submarine barrage 
efficient and who were so constantly exposed to attack by an enemy at 
whom they could not hit back. He 1s equally full of praise and admiration 
for the work of the mine-sweeping trawlers manned also largely by fisher- 
men, and the work also of the paddle mine-sweepers during the later 
stages of the War. 

It should never be forgotten that it was largely upon the men mentioned 
above that the real stress of war lay in the Dover Patrol, and to them is due 
the success achieved by the Patrol during the four and a half years of 
war. They were commanded by officers who, as- Admiral Bacon states, 
were second to none. 

The work of the Patrol was inspired during its most critical period 
by the gallant and distinguished author of this book. 


Yee 
eee ee 


CHAPTER 


I. 
II. 


iil. 


IV. 


VIII. 


XIII. 


CONTENTS 


HISTORICAL 

STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 

GERMAN STRATEGY 

SHIPS OF THE PATROL 

THe MISCELLANEOUS FLEET 
"TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC . 

THe TRAWLERS 

Cross-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 

THE GRAVEYARD 

BoOMBARDMENTS 

EARLY MORNING 

THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 
THe TRIBALS 

THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 
THE SONG OF THE BELGIAN CoasT PATROL 
BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 
THE Dover STRAITS ROULETTE 

THE DRIFTERS 

WATCHING THE DOVER STRAITS 

Tue Great LANDING 

THE DREAM . 


PLAN FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 


ZEEBRUGGE 
DovER AND DUNKIRK 


THe Tipes—To DuNKIRK 
13 


PAGE 


14 
CHAPTER 


XIV. 


XV. 


XVI. 


Hl. 


CONTENTS 


SMALL CRAFT 

Motor Launcues—CoastaL Motor Boats 
OPERATIONS . 

EXPERIENCE 

THs Arr SERVICES OF THB Dover PATROL 
Tue Srrare or THE Kite BALLOON 
RECAPITULATION 


L’Envo! 


APPENDIX 
DESTROYERS AND 'TORPEDO-BOATS OF THE ORIGINAL SIXTH FLOTILLA 


DESTROYERS, P Boats AND M MONITORS WHICH JOINED THE 
SIXTH FLOTILLA AND CRUISERS ATTACHED TO THE PATROL 


NAMES OF Masters OF Cross-CHANNEL TRANSPORTS 


PAGE 


247 
254 
255 
274 
275 
290 
292 


300 


301 


397 
313 


PLATE 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


ADMIRAL Sir REGINALD Bacon, K.C.B., K.C.V.O., D.S.O. Frontispiece 


FACING PAGE 


JEAN-BART : g 

ADMIRAL RONARC’H, COMMANDING THE FRENCH NAVAL FOoRcsEs 
IN THE NORTHERN ZONE . ‘ . , : . 

TRIPOD LAID FOR SERVICE 

C 65 CARRYING A TRIPOD AT SEA . 

CHART SHOWING THE DISPOSITION OF THB Sirs AND Danek 
STATIONS FOR THE BOMBARDMENT OF ZEEBRUGGE, AUGUST 
1915 ' : : : : : : j 

ZEEBRUGGE LOCKS : 

THE RESULT OF THE BOMBARDMENT OF OSTEND, JUNE 5TH, 1917 

H.M.S. ‘‘ VIKING ”’ AFTER BEING MINED . 

GRAVE OF BRITISH FLYING OFFICER AT OSTEND 

LANDING 12-INCH GUNS FROM THE “ ears CRAUFURD’”’ AT 
DUNKIRK . : 


THE 12-INCH MARK x Gun MOUNTED AT ‘ccccea FIRING AT 
THE TIRPITZ BATTERY 


TANKS CARRYING INCLINED-WAYS IN FRONT OF THEM TO ENABLE 
THEM TO CLIMB THE COPING OF THE MIDDELKERKE SRA-WALL 


TANKS, HAVING PLACED THE INCLINED-WAYS IN POSITION, CLIMB- 
ING THE REPLICA OF THE SEA-WALL AND PARAPET AT MIDDEL- 
KERKE A 


MONITORS WITH PONTOON IN FRONT STEAMING AT SBA 
PONTOON BEING PLACED IN POSITION AHEAD OF THE MONITORS 


HicH WATER 
Low WATER 


CHART OF ZEEBRUGGE Hiasoun SHOWING THE PROPOSED Susiien 
OF THE Two MONITORS FOR LANDING THE ATTACKING PARTY 
AND FIRING ON THE LOCK GATES. ; ; 


MONITORS BOMBARDING OSTEND FROM BEHIND A Sree ae 
MADE BY THB Motor LAUNCHES , ; : 


Tue ADMIRAL AND HIS STAFF : : . : : A 
A PLAN OF DUNKIRK SHOWING THB BOMBS AND SHELLS DROPPED 


INTO THE TOWN . : : - 
INSPECTION OF THE R.N. AIR once AT oe BY H.M. KING 
GEORGE V e e e e e e e e 


15 


24 


HUNTING THE SUBMARINE 


With the sky above and the mine beneath, and a gale with its blast so keen ; 
We laughed, m’lad, and we chaffed, m’lad, as we hunted the submarine. 


With the sky above, and the sea above, and a void where our ship had been, 
It’s our pride, m’lad, to have died, m’lad, in hunting the submarine. 


With the sky above and the ground beneath, through our labours you walk 
serene, 
Set one thought aside for the lads who died in hunting the submarine. 


THE CONCISE STORY 
OF THE DOVER PATROL 


CHAPTER I 
HISTORICAL 


The historic battles of the Dover area—Weakening of the defence afforded by the 
Channel—Jean Bart—His wonderful activities—His practical illustration of 
the means he used to break blockade—Lord Nelson in the Channel—The 
occupation of the coast by the Germans—Admiral Hood—The command 
offered to me—The progress of work in the Patrol divided into periods—My 
staff—Difficulty of extracting officers out of the Admiralty—Officers sub- 
sequently appointed. 


N all our European wars the Straits of Dover and the southern part 
of the North Sea that fringes the Belgian coast have been areas 
of considerable strategic importance. 

Until the late War Dover was a seaport town of moderate reputation 
only, known better from its connection with the passenger and mail 
service to France than with the Royal Navy. The magnificent harbour, 
which was completed at the commencement of the century, at once raised 
Dover to a Naval port of real value, and for this reason its name has been 
associated with the forces which acted in the adjacent waters. 

Though the name of “‘ Dover ” is linked with no outstanding episode 
in our Naval history, we find that the area held by the Dover Patrol 
during the War was the scene of six out of the fourteen most important 
battles fought by the British Navy—no other locality can boast so fine 
arecord. These battles were : 

The one in which Hubert de Burgh defeated in 1217 Eustace the Monk, 
who tried to pass reinforcements across the Channel. “ If these people 
land, England is lost. Let us therefore boldly meet them,”’ declared de 
Burgh. It has been said that no more admirably planned, and no more 
fruitful battle has ever been fought by Englishmen on water. 

The battle of Sluys, on June 24th, 1340, off Zeebrugge, when Edward 
III gained a victory over the French. ‘Two hundred and thirty French 
ships were taken, and two admirals and several thousand Frenchmen 
were killed. Our losses were insignificant. 

The Armada of 1588 was finally dispersed off Dover and the shoals 
off the Belgian coast. 


19 


20 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


In the Four Days’ Battle, July 11th-14th, 1666, between Monk and 
de Ruyter, eighty English and one hundred Dutch ships were engaged. 
It was one of the most remarkable actions fought at sea, the Dutch losing 
three vice-admirals, two thousand men, and four ships. The English 
loss was five thousand killed, three thousand prisoners, and seventeen 
ships. 

Off the North Foreland, on August 4th, 1666, the Dutch were completely 
defeated by Monk. The English Fleet followed the Dutch, entered one 
of their ports, and destroyed a large fleet of shipping. 

The battle of Beachy Head, July roth, 1690, where seventy French 
ships engaged fifty-six English and Dutch—the French gaining the victory. 

Why, it may be asked, has the area of the Dover Patrol been con- 
spicuously linked with so many Naval battles ? The answer is a simple 
one. The Straits of Dover have always constituted the bottle neck of 
the food supply of London, and the main route of its overseas commerce ; 
as well as being the narrowest part of the belt of water protecting this 
country from invasion. It was therefore bound to be of first-class import- 
ance in a war in which France, Holland, or Belgium was our antagonist ; 
so that, in the autumn of 1914, the appearance of the Germans on the 
Belgian coast immediately raised the Straits of Dover and the waters 
off the north coast of France to a foremost place in the titanic conflict 
that was to convulse Europe for the next four years. 

Dover Castle throughout English history has been associated with 
internal troubles, and has a great military record ; but, ever since the time 
of the Norman Conquest, Dover, so far as invasion is concerned, has been 
untroubled. The cliffs of Dover, crowned by the castle, have always 
stood as a passive symbol of solidity and national security. Like most 
popular hero-worship, the esteem in which these cliffs are held is entirely 
undeserved. The cliffs of Dover switched Julius Czsar in his second and 
successful landing to the eastward to Deal, and William the Norman to 
the westward to the lower lands of the Romney Marshes; they never 
stopped invasion. The cliffs were valuable only in defending themselves ; 
and, even then, afforded only temporary self-preservation ; for, like all 
fortresses, Dover Castle capitulated as soon as the neighbouring country, 
less protected by nature, fell into the enemy’s hands. The cliffs of Dover 
are rather like those popular people who, looking impressive and talking 
in fine phrases, do nothing but get all the credit ! 

The real credit for the security of England in the past lies with the 
waters of the Channel and its tides; but, in the popular mind, the sea is 
often forgotten and the land takes the praise. The Channel, that in- 
valuable twenty by twenty miles of water, is worth five million cliffs of 
‘Dover. English men and women are rarely enthusiastic about the 
Channel ; it is to them a cause of woe in peace time when wishing to pass 
to the Continent ; but it has, nevertheless, always been our best friend 
in war. It defends us, and we have ever had to assist it in the defence ; 
it is both a moat to our island stronghold, and a highway of our life- 
supplying commerce. 


HISTORICAL 21 


In the late War these waters became a frontier, moreover, the nearest 
frontier to the enemy. ‘The importance of the locality rose to the level it 
held in the early part of the last century, but its natural defensive attributes 
had been much weakened, and had waxed relatively feeble, owing to the 
progress of mechanical science. There is something sad in the thought 
of the old Channel, once so strong, having its natural strength impaired 
by modern inventions ; for its tactical width and the strength of its tides 
have been reduced in value by the speed of the intruding vessels, and the 
increased range of their guns. Destroyers, submarines, and high-speed 
vessels now heed less the old moat than did, in the old days, ships depen- 
dent on wind and tide. The active forces for its defence in the late War, 
therefore, grew out of all proportion to those which, previously, had 
been known in its waters. It is this progress, this reinforcement of our old 
natural defence, the Channel, as well as the extended offence exercised 
by the Dover force, that render the story of the Dover Patrol in the War so 
arresting and important. 

It was necessary to close the Straits to the German vessels which were 
based on the Belgian ports, and to offer adequate protection to the flank 
of the stream of transports and store-ships passing to and from France, 
where our Army was fighting against heavy odds, while, at the same time, 
keeping the channel-way open for the immense volume of shipping carry- 
ing food and other necessaries to London and the important ports on 
the East Coast. In short, we had to close the Straits to the enemy, 
frustrating any attempt at invasion, and to protect those waters and keep 
them open for our own use. Those were the varied tasks that were thrown 
on the force stationed at Dover, known to history as the Dover Patrol. 

The history of the southern waters of the North Sea which formed an 
important portion of the Dover Patrol would fill a volume of its own ; 
but, for our purpose, it will be sufficient to deal with two epochs only 
when this area came prominently into notice, under conditions somewhat 
similar to those which obtained during the late War. The first of these is 
roughly between 1671 and 1697, when Jean Bart, the famous commerce 
raider, made Dunkirk his headquarters; and the second when Lord 
Nelson commanded the light forces in the waters which became in the 
late War the Dover Patrol area. 

In 1671 Jean Bart, then twenty-one years of age, joined the French 
sea forces at the time when Louis XIV and Charles II had formed an 
alliance against the Dutch. His raids on Dutch commerce in the three 
succeeding years were so fruitful that he, at his own expense, was able to 
fit out, in 1675, a sloop carrying two guns and thirty-six men; and at 
once captured a Dutch frigate mounting eighteen guns and carrying 
sixty-five men. He continued to take prizes, and, joining with other men 
of like spirit, fitted out a 10-gun ship and captured a Dutch 12-gun ship. 
He then was given command of five frigates, and on March 23rd, 1676, 
he captured an 18-gun Dutchman. Shortly after he met eight merchant 
ships from London, escorted by three ships of war, captured one of the 
escorts, drove the others off, and took the merchantmen into Dunkirk. 


22 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


In May 1677 he captured a frigate and sixteen merchantmen. In Septem- 
ber of the same year he captured the Neptune, 36-gun frigate, and her 
convoy. During the years previously mentioned he secured forty-nine 
vessels | In 1688 he commanded a 24-gun frigate, and took a Dutch priva- 
teer. In 1688 France was at war with England, and he met two 50-gun 
British ships and was taken prisoner. Almost immediately afterwards 
he escaped from Plymouth in a pulling-boat, and landed near St. Malo, 
after rowing for two and a half days in the Channel, although still suffering 
from a wound. 

In 1690 Jean Bart was given command of a frigate, and fought under the 
Count de Tourville at the battle of Beachy Head. His next task was to 
escort two valuable ships from Hamburg to Dunkirk, and while waiting 
for them to be ready for sea, he cruised in the North Sea and ransomed 
vessels to the amount of 45,000 crowns. He subsequently took his convoy 
safely to Dunkirk. In 1691 he was blockaded in Dunkirk, but persuaded 
the King of France to let him fit out some small vessels. With these he 
slipped out at night, opening fire on the blockading squadron as he passed. 
The following evening he captured two English ships, one carrying 
fifty and the other forty guns, as well as some merchantmen. These 
he took to Bergen. He then seized two 4o-gun Dutch ships which were 
escorting a large fishing fleet, burning most of these vessels and landing 
their crews on the English coast. Later on he captured and burned a 
Dutch 36-gun frigate, and made many more prizes. 

Next he raided Scotland, plundering and setting fire to villages. He 
was nearly taken prisoner by treachery on board an English ship at Bergen, 
but he turned the tables on the captain and crew by standing over a powder 
cask, and threatening to blow the ship up. The arrival of his own men 
enabled him to capture the vessel. 

He then returned to Dunkirk and went to Paris, where he at once 
made himself notorious by smoking his pipe in the ante-room while waiting 
for an audience with the King. On King Louis asking him how he 
managed to break the blockade at Dunkirk, he arranged the courtiers 
present in a line and went for them with his fists, knocking them down as 
a practical demonstration. Again blockaded in Dunkirk in October 1693, 
he successfully broke out, and at once captured four British vessels and 
carried them to France. Subsequently he captured seven out of a fleet of 
eighty English merchant ships, and took their crews on board his own ship. 

He then raided the English coast near Newcastle, coming back from his 
cruise with spoil calculated at 500,000 crowns. Again setting out from 
Dunkirk with three frigates he captured more merchant vessels. Before 
returning he fell in with three men-of-war escorting a convoy, and 
with the aid of two other frigates, captured two of the men-of-war. After 
boarding the 54-gun ship three times, he was beaten back and she escaped, 
leaving to him, however, the merchant convoy. He missed capturing the 
Prince of Orange on his way to England, through the small squadron 
lowering their flags to him. Not knowing of the presence of the Prince, 
he let the ships pass. 


HISTORICAL 23 


Next he captured a Dutch fleet laden with corn and other goods, which 
was being convoyed by one 48-gun ship, one vessel of forty guns and 
another of thirty-six guns. He captured the largest, the other two made 
off, he also on this occasion took eighteen merchant ships. Again, in 
May 1694, he was blockaded in Dunkirk ; but, as there was a corn fleet 
much needed for the supply of bread to France in the north ready to 
sail, he again broke out. This time he employed the ruse of sending small 
vessels to show lights and attract the attention of the blockading fleet in 
one direction along the coast, while he and his ships slipped past the other 
end of the blockade line. The Dutch meanwhile had fitted out a fleet 
of eight ships to intercept the corn ships. This they did, but Jean Bart, 
knowing the importance of this wheat to France, exclaimed: ‘‘ We must 
bring them to action: the interests of France call upon us.” He met 
the Dutch men-of-war, went straight for the Admiral’s ship, boarded and 
took her. His other vessels captured two more of the fleet and the remain- 
ing five made off. He retook all the corn vessels. This capture led 
to corn in France falling from forty livres to three livres per bushel. 

Afterwards Jean Bart, with six line-of-battle ships, took the Prince de 
Conti from Dunkirk to Denmark, en route to Poland. During the voyage 
he had to break past a squadron of nineteen of the enemy. When clear 
of danger, the Prince asked Jean Bart if he had not been afraid that the 
enemy might have captured them. Much to the Prince’s horror, Jean 
Bart informed him that not the slightest danger of such a contingency had 
existed, as his son had been stationed with a match in the magazine, ready 
to blow up the ship on receiving a prearranged signal. This was his last 
exploit in the North Sea. 

The above rapid sketch gives an idea of what a determined seaman 
did in waters traversed by hostile trade, even when the odds were greatly 
against him. The objectives available to Jean Bart were no more numer- 
ous, in fact not so numerous or valuable as those open to the Germans 
when in possession of the Belgian coast. Our shipping, and that of 
the French, during the four years and more of the War, must have far 
exceeded in number that of the English and Dutch at the end of the 
seventeenth century. Jean Bart was the embodiment of the sea -instinct 
and sea-genius of a raider. The way he stirred up the waters of the North 
Sea with the small force at his disposal might well have formed an object 
lesson to the Germans on the Belgian coast. If they had carefully studied 
Naval history and had they seized their opportunity, they could have 
done infinitely more damage to England than Jean Bart was able to effect. 
But that is a matter that will be dealt with later. 

The other epoch to be studied is that when Napoleon Buonaparte, in 
1801, threatened England with invasion; and Lord Nelson, fresh from 
the Baltic and Copenhagen, was appointed to command the Eastern 
Channel and the waters from the Thames to the Scheldt. This command 
only differed from that of the Dover Patrol in that the entrance of the 
Thames, as far as Orfordness on the Suffolk coast, came under Nelson’s 
orders. The northern limit of his command was roughly a line from 


24 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Orfordness to West Capelle on the north shore of the Scheldt, and that 
of the Dover Patrol during the late War was a line from the North Fore- 
land to the same point on the Dutch coast. 

Lord Nelson was in active command only from July 27th to October 
22nd, when peace preliminaries were signed. His flag, however, was not 
struck till April roth, 1802. 

The work of the command was similar to that of the Dover Patrol 
in that it was chiefly concerned with preventing vessels landing troops in 
England, and in protecting our commerce. The problem of landing in 
England from Calais and Boulogne was far more difficult to the French 
in 1801, than landing on the French coast from Ostend to the Germans in 
1916. The possibilities of a landing force starting for England from the 
Flanders ports, were the same then as now, except that Flushing and 
Dunkirk were then added to the possible ports of departure. 

It may be interesting to make a brief comparison between the con- 
ditions imposed in the Dover area, by sail and the short-range gun, and, 
a century afterwards, by steam and the long-range gun. Submarines had 
no counterpart at the opening of the nineteenth century, neither were 
there any vessels for raiding purposes comparable to modern destroyers. 
These two classes of vessels, so far as commerce attack and protection 
were concerned, represented a development entirely to our disadvantage— 
that is, a disadvantage to the defensive side. The commerce of England 
in 1801 had merely to keep to the English side of the Channel to be more 
or less immune from attack ; since, with ships at Beachy Head, Dungeness, 
and the Downs, a raider should have had little chance, whatever the wind 
might be, of again making a French port without being laid abroad. More- 
over, our men-of-war could be, and were, kept in the offing of the French 
ports, quite free from danger from attack, and there exercised a whole- 
some check on the vessels, comparatively small in size, that could issue 
from those ports. The chief fear of attack on shipping (as shown by 
Nelson’s letter to Captain Ferrier of H.M.S. York) was by rowing-boats 
and small craft putting out from the French ports during periods of fog. 
These required fine weather and a fair wind to make the passage across 
the Channel. Nelson had a very poor opinion of their value. On August 
3rd he wrote to Admiral Skeffington: ‘‘ Of the craft that I have seen, 
I do not think it possible to row them to England, and sail they cannot.” 
On another occasion he gave them half a knot’s speed. A concentration 
of our ships at Dungeness and the Downs was a complete answer to this 
threat. 

Increase in range of the gun is all in favour of the shore battery with a 
steady platform, its small area of vulnerability, and its better range-finding 
possibilities. 

Steam brought with it the possibility of rapid movement in every 
direction, a virtue which was unknown in the days of sailing vessels. 
The torpedo at night makes inshore blockading impossible in places where 
before, except in onshore gales, it was practicable to apply the blockade. 
Even so no vessel was taken by Nelson’s Flanders blockade ; but twice 


HISTORICAL ag 


vessels escaped from Flushing and Dunkirk. Even under the more 
favourable conditions of old time warfare inshore blockade was proved 
to be unreliable. 

Steam is all in favour of the raider, either for commerce destruction or 
attacks on shipping. The fundamental time-cycles of dark and light 
remain constant. The longer the distance he can annihilate during dark 
hours, the greater the advantage to the seaman with the initiative. In 
the late War, steam, torpedo, and the submarine intensified one hundred- 
fold the difficulties of the Dover Command as compared with those of 
Nelson’s time of command. 

Nelson’s first offensive was to bombard Boulogne. On this occasion 
he sank about five of the flat-boats. Evidently he was convinced that 
bombardment was not a very satisfactory method of destroying the 
craft, as he dismissed the operation in a letter to the Admiralty by saying 
that, “‘ The whole business is of no further moment than to show the enemy 
that with impunity they cannot come outside their ports.” He subsequently 
remarked that, ‘ The enemy can be more annoyed by firing into their 
harbour at night than by greater and larger attacks.” The possibility of 
an attack on Calais was mentioned in a letter to Lord St. Vincent: “I 
believe Calais could be bombarded, but do you think it an object?” 
This proposal was not followed up. 

About the same time his attention was fixed on the possibility of an 
attack on the vessels in Flushing. After going over to West Capelle, with 
a view to seeing Captain Owen, his remarks are interesting: ‘“‘ Captain 
Owen is close to us: I shall know Captain Owen’s ideas. His zeal, 
I am afraid, has made him overleap sand-banks and tide and laid him on 
board the enemy ; but I must clear away these little obstacles before I can 
give him scope for intentions. I admire his desire, and could join most 
heartily in it, but we cannot do impossibilities, and I am as little used to 
find out the impossible as most folk, but I think I can discriminate between 
the impracticable and the fair prospect of success.” ‘These were the 
sober words coming from Nelson, who was the embodiment of British 
sea power employed offensively. His considered opinion was that 
Flushing was outside possible attack. 

A second attack was carried out on Boulogne on August 15th. This 
time a cutting-out expedition was planned, but failed from three causes. 
The boats in the harbour were moored to the bottom, as well as to each 
other, with chains which defied cutting. The infantry ashore brought a 
heavy fire to bear on the flat-boats after they had been boarded by our 
men and the French crews had left; and, lastly, the attack was not 
sufficiently synchronised. Nelson assigned the dark night and the tide 
as the main causes of failure. This was his last offensive operation. 
He planned one more, that of sending a fire-ship into Boulogne; but 
peace preliminaries prevented this materialising. 

As a matter of fact, so far as can be gleaned from his published 
dispatches, Nelson was out of his element in a service of this nature. 
So long as there was a chance of the enemy coming out and being fought 


26 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


at sea, or of his carrying out some important operations, he was eager 
and full of fire. But when confronted with the difficulties and disap- 
pointments inherent to inshore work, and called upon to exhibit the 
patience required to carry on such tiresome and exacting operations, he 
appears to have lost interest. Writing to Alexander Davidson even on 
August 31st—only one month after taking up the command—he says : 
“ T agree with you and all my friends, that is not a service for me beyond 
the moment of alarm; but I am used and abused.’’ He certainly was 
abused later on! His failure at Boulogne brought abuse—a common 
fate even in the late War. As regards a critic called Hill, who attempted 
to blackmail him, he writes: “I wish the wretch had been caught as an 
example ; not but that I am indifferent to all they say against me, because 
I know that I have always done my duty to the best of my ability.” Many 
others can say the same. And in a letter of September 14th, 1801, he 
remarks: ‘“‘ The people at the watering-places have been very free in 
their conversations, and I believe the Mayor of Deal either put a vagabond 
in prison, or sent him out of the town, for arraigning my conduct in 
being careless of poor seamen’s lives. But I do not trouble my head on 
these matters ; my conscience tells me that I do my best. You will easily 
believe that I should have liked to have tried the business at Goree, but 
the objections to it were innumerable. . . . If success attended it, it 
would be said: ‘ Aye, the Admiralty gave from partiality this to their 
favourite’ (for I do flatter myself that I am a favourite). If it mis- 
carried, then it would be said: ‘ That vain man Nelson thought he could 
do what no one else could, and his friends at the Admiralty had folly 
enough to believe in his impossible schemes. . . .’ That wardrooms 
will prate that none of us can doubt, and it has its bad effects. The boat 
service is got very unpopular. G—— flogged some of his chaps severely 
for some very improper expressions. They belonged to the Unité, who 
was, I fancy, in very bad order.” 

One or two other extracts from his letters at this period are interesting 
as showing how in 1801 the same underlying strategical principles persisted 


as in 1916, though the material was difficult. On September 4th he 
writes : 


‘In fine weather our squadrons go and show themselves, but never 
risk being crippled or droven into the North Sea. Thus we shall be sure 
of an effective force ready to act whenever occasion calls for it; and with 
the large force their Lordships have appointed for the protection of our 
coasts, if it is kept in order, I do not see how the enemy can with impunity 
put into the Channel.”’ 7 


He therefore had come to the conclusion that husbanding his force was 
the right course to pursue. Our experience was the same. Again, as 
regards his relations with the First Lord of the Admiralty, he writes : 


‘* Your kind letter I received half an hour before the attack ;_ but, my 
dear Lord, although I disapprove of unnecessary consultations as much as 


HISTORICAL 27 


any man, yet, being close to the Admiralty I should not feel myself 
justified in risking our ships through the Channels of Flushing without 
buoys and pilots, without a consultation of such men as your lordship, 
and also I believe you would think an order absolutely necessary.” 


This is the ideal procedure. It is interesting to speculate how he would 
have reviewed an Operations Committee at the Admiralty interfering with 
his Command | 

Again, he values experience bred of locality when on September 4th 
he writes : “‘ But I submit my opinion with deference, never having been 
used to the service of the North Sea and this part of the Channel.” On 
October 6th, just before giving up command, we find: ‘‘ One happiness 
under my command, that not one English boat has been captured by 
the enemy during the time of my command within the limits of the 
station.” 

It is interesting to note the restless zeal at the commencement of his 
command, before he knew the difficulties: hurrying bombing vessels to 
Boulogne, and writing to the senior officer off Dunkirk to know if he could 
attack the vessels there the next night. He projected an attack on Flushing, 
but after only three months, having learned the hard facts of inshore 
work, his great comfort on giving up the command, the one real material 
item achieved, was that he had protected the English shipping so that none 
had been lost. 

Had Jean Bart been pitted against Nelson, both would probably have 
had different tales to tell. One hundred years elapsed between Jean Bart 
and Nelson, and one hundred years between Nelson and the late War ; 
but the lessons to be gleaned are the same, tempered only by evolutionary 
changes in material. 

The chief local alteration that took place between 1801 and the late War, 
was the building of the enclosed harbour at Dover. Dover harbour 
was commenced in the reign of Henry VII. Great improvements were 
further planned by Henry VIII, but unfortunately the mole he built 
merely trapped shingle, and did more harm than good. Queen Elizabeth 
took the matter in hand, and in 1582 appointed a Commission to investigate 
the subject. Sir Thomas Scott put forward proposals to make a pent, the 
waters of which at low tides could be released so as to scour out the 
shingle. This scheme after certain modifications had been carried out was 
successful ; but, eventually being neglected, the pent fell into bad con- 
dition in Charles II’s reign. Many other projects were tried, but it was not 
till 1850, when the Admiralty Pier was completed, that a really good 
protection was afforded. In 1897, the year before the passing of the first 
German Navy Act, the Admiralty decided to build an enclosed harbour. 
In 1907 the work was completed and formally opened by King George V, 
then Prince of Wales. It was a fortunate thing that this project had been 
undertaken and completed before the War burst upon us. 

The present enclosed harbour was intended to accommodate battle- 
ships as well as destroyers and submarines, but at certain states of the 


28 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


tides the currents at the entrances were found to be too dangerous. Our 
probable sea antagonists changed almost imperceptibly from France to 
Germany; and the British battle squadrons were therefore gradually 
moved further and further north. The occupation of the Belgian 
coast by Germany never entered into the ordinary forecast of a war with 
that country. Our eyes, even when the War started, were focussed on the 
Elbe, and not on Ostend or Zeebrugge. Dover was not even then con- 
sidered a base of particular importance. 

The Dover Flotilla, therefore, at the outbreak of war formed part of the 
East Coast Command under Rear-Admiral George A. Ballard, who had 
made Harwich his headquarters in accordance with the Admiralty plans. 
Its chief function was to prevent German ships breaking through and 
passing down-Channel. All German homeward-bound ships were inter- 
cepted by the Dover Flotilla, and those belonging to neutrals examined 
to see whether they carried contraband of war. Consequently all vessels 
of every sort, British and neutral, were made to anchor in the Downs and 
were there examined while at anchor. In order to prevent any ships slip- 
ping through the wide waters between the Goodwins and the northern 
French coast, a large mine-field was laid, which closed all this water to 
traffic. A channel was left close to the French coast from Calais to Dunkirk 
for use of our merchant ships and the vessels of the Patrol. 

It, however, soon became apparent that Dover and the Narrows of the 
Channel were destined to become of greater importance than the remainder 
of the East Coast. The rapid advance of the enemy on Paris, with the 
consequent capture of a large portion of Belgium ; the necessity for keep- 
ing Open communication with our increasing Army in France, and the 
desirability of stopping submarines from passing down-Channel to inter- 
fere with our transports and storeships, all pointed to the strategic import- 
ance of the Dover area. It was, therefore, made a separate command 
under Rear-Admiral Hon. Horace Hood, a very able and gallant officer, 
who lost his life subsequently leading a division of battle-cruisers at the 
battle of Jutland. 

Drifters, to drift nets to catch and entangle submarines, and trawlers, 
to sweep for mines and to regulate traffic, were added to the command. 
An efficient examination service was started at Ramsgate with a liberal 
complement of armed boarding-steamers. A small fleet of armed 
drifters was also supplied for the defence of the Downs against submarines. 

During this period the restricted forces of the Dover Patrol operated 
with good effect against the enemy marching along the Belgian coast by 
assisting the Army with such gunfire as the vessels were able to bring to 
bear. I regret that the operations under Admiral Hood do not fall within 
the scope of this short history, for they were of much importance, and had 
a marked influence on the subsequent situation on the coast. However, 
space does not permit for even a brief record. 

There is little doubt that the presence of this Flotilla under Admiral 
Hood assisted our Army by delaying the enemy when he moved west- 
ward with the intention of seizing the Channel ports. The Germans had 


HISTORICAL 29 


made elaborate preparations for this offensive. Every eventuality, as they 
thought, had been prepared for and every possibility foreseen, but fire 
from the Naval guns was unsuspected, and the arrangements for the 
enemy’s troop transport along the coast had suddenly to be remodelled. 
Such delays were of the greatest value to the Allies during the race for 
the possession of the Yser Canal and the north coast of France. Hours 
were then of vital importance—our Naval forces could not stop the 
advance, all they could do was to cause delay. 

Zeebrugge and Ostend were taken, and the advance still crept westward 
until the gallant stand made by the French Naval Division at Dixmude 
under Admiral Ronarc’h, and Sir John French’s masterly extension of 
his left flank to join the French on the coast, gradually brought the German 
movement to a standstill. The situation was then one to occasion our 
Naval authorities anxiety, for the enemy’s light Naval forces were brought 
within less than a night’s steaming of our coast and threatened our sea 
communications. In fact, the whole strategical position in southern waters 
had undergone an unexpected and unwelcome change. 

This carries the history of the Dover Patrol down to the point at which 
I am able to bring personal knowledge to bear on the narrative, and onward 
to the end of 1917, when I was suddenly superseded. 

Early in 1915 I was in France in command of the 15-inch howitzers, 
which had been designed and constructed under me at the Coventry 
Ordnance Works. It was congenial work. In April I received a telegram 
to go to the Admiralty, and found that Mr. Churchill and Lord Fisher 
were anxious to send one howitzer to the Mediterranean, to assist our 
troops landed at Gallipoli. They wanted to know the earliest date 
at which one could start; I promised, if they telegraphed at once to my 
headquarters in France, to have one ready to leave Marseilles in two days’ 
time providing suitable trucks were available. I left the same afternoon 
with the French Naval Attaché, the Marquis de St. Seine, to arrange 
about the trucks. The next day we brought down the howitzer by road, 
and I was prepared to leave myself for Paris en route for the Dardanelles. 

The next evening I received another wire calling me to London. I saw 
Mr. Churchill, who asked me to take command of the Dover Patrol. 
I was not at all anxious to do so, as I was looking forward to going to the 
East ; I knew nothing of Dover and the work being done there. Never- 
theless, I left the next morning for Dover, and found that Rear-Admiral 
Hood was no more anxious to go in charge of a divisjon of light cruisers 
off the Irish coast than I was to relinquish my guns. However, the 
change was made, and the next morning I took over the command, not 
without considerable misgivings, as I understood from Lord Fisher that 
the tenure of the Dover Command varied directly with the number of 
submarines sunk! Apparently this was to be quite independent of 
the difficulty of the problem of tackling them, which was one to which, 
at that time, not much attention had been given. As I had started the 
submarine boats in our Navy in 1900, and had held the appointment of 
Superintending-Captain of Submarines till 1904, I had a good knowledge 


30 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


of the difficulties of locating, and attacking successfully, even the early 
classes of boats, small, slow, and with a limited radius of action. I there- 
fore anticipated quite a short stay at Dover. My predecessor and I could 
have written, as did Lord Nelson to Lord St. Vincent on taking up the 
command of the Dover Patrol: ‘‘ Everything, my dear lord, must have a 
beginning, and literally we are at the foundation of the fabric of our 
defence.” 

I found that the Patrol was organised mainly with a view to hunting 
submarines and preventing them passing the Narrows and attacking 
our merchant shipping; and that, in addition, certain vessels were 
available for bombarding the enemy’s positions on the Belgian coast. 
Everything that could have been done Admiral Hood had done, and it 
was merely for me to continue his work and amplify and expand his 
organisation as further resources became available. 

It would be only wearisome to attempt a chronological account of the 
doings of the Patrol. It is better to give accounts, I fear brief and in many 
respects incomplete, of the main activities, and further, to do this from the 
point of view of the vessels employed. To compress this into the space 
of a single volume must necessarily cause a good deal to be left unwritten. 

It will be convenient to divide the periods between 1915 and the end 
of 1917 into certain epochs which were marked by definite changes in the 
work of the Patrol. 

_ The first period was from April 1915 to August of the same year, when 
our main work consisted of drifting nets to catch submarines, and in 
working out a system of long-range bombardments, besides devising and 
providing the necessary materials and equipment required to carry them 
out. During this time the 12-inch monitors began to arrive. In July the 
first mine-field was laid by enemy submarines—an unexpected and 
unpleasant development. 

The second period extended from August 1915 to March 1916, when 
bombardments with the monitors of Zeebrugge, Ostend, and the coast 
of Middelkerke and Westende were undertaken whenever the weather 
permitted. Our air force was augmented, and spotting from aeroplanes 
and seaplanes was brought to a state of real utility. During this time mine- 
laying by the enemy’s submarines increased to an alarming extent, while 
the old drift-net system Abie useless to stop their operations. A plan 
to block Ostend was worked out and the necessary vessels fitted, but the 
attempt was abandoned since a project to land troops in that port behind 
the enemy’s guns came under consideration jointly with the Army in 
France. It was thought most injudicious to close the ports of Belgium, 
since we might have occasion to use them for our own troops, in case of 
an advance by our Army along the coast. This was a consideration that 
was constantly urged by the military authorities until almost the end of 
my period of command. 

The third epoch from April till October 1916 saw the first barrage 
laid off the Belgian coast while the drift-nets in the Channel were relin- 
quished. The whole of the resources of the Dover Command were required 


HISTORICAL 31 


to keep this obstacle intact ; a daily patrol in sight of Ostend and Zee- 
brugge was maintained, which at the same time protected the Downs 
and our merchant traffic. One 12-inch mark X, and four g-2-inch guns 
were landed and installed behind the French lines. 

The fourth period extended from October 1916 to March 1917, when 
winter weather necessitated the raising of the Belgian coast blockade. 
The 15-inch monitors arrived, which made bombardment again possible, 
sO preparations were made to carry out further bombardments of Zee- 
brugge and Ostend. The landing in Ostend, as originally planned, was 
abandoned in favour of one on the shore near Middelkerke, where 
possibilities existed for obtaining a larger front for landing. Two more 
fifty-ton 12-inch, three long 9-2-inch, and eight 7-5-inch guns were 
mounted ashore. This period saw the beginning of the raids by enemy 
destroyers in the Channel, which ended in circumstances which will be 
described later on. The net barrage from the Goodwins to Dunkirk was 
laid, and I obtained approval to lay a mine barrage from Folkestone to 
Gris-Nez as soon as mines became available, since I maintained that this 
was the only method of stopping submarines passing down the Channel. 
Mining by the enemy continued to be a nuisance. 

The fifth period from March 1917 to January 1918 was one of expectant 
waiting for the great landing on the Belgian coast, which, however, had to be 
abandoned in October owing to the Army being held up on the Passchen- 
daele Ridge. The Navy, in short, could not act without the Army ; 
and, in the end, came the great disappointment, for the Army was unable 
to co-operate. During this period the second barrage was laid off the 
Belgian coast, and the daily patrol was started and kept going right into 
the winter, thanks to the good sea-going qualities of the 15-inch monitors. 
The Folkestone to Gris-Nez mine barrage was laid, and the first enemy 
submarine was blown up in it before it was completed. It eventually 
confirmed my conviction as to its value as the antidote to the submarines, 
and became the graveyard of many submarines. Zeebrugge and Ostend 
were bombarded at this period with such success that the latter port was 
deserted and never used again by the enemy as a Naval base. Plans were 
prepared for bombarding the docks at Bruges at a range of twenty-two 
miles, and the necessary alterations to the monitors were begun. During 
this period, the last months of my appointment, the blocking of Zeebrugge 
and Ostend were planned and details approved ; since all hope of using 
these ports in connection with the Flanders offensive by the Army had 
been abandoned. 

This brief survey will give, perhaps, a sufficient suggestion of the 
progressive nature of the work of the Dover Patrol. With the events 
subsequent to January 1918, I need not deal except to remark that this 
period saw the completion of the projects which had already been planned, 
not in some cases in the way the Dover Patrol of 1917 would have wished. 
The monitors were not completed in time to bombard Bruges, and the 
details of the Zeebrugge and Ostend attack were unfortunately altered 
in a way which led to large and needless loss of life. 


32 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The organisation which was then adopted for the vessels on the 
Folkestone—Gris-Nez barrage was one which I had reported to be funda- 
mentally bad—it was, however, persisted in and led again to a heavy and 
needless loss of life. 

No new project was carried out before the Armistice was signed 
which had not been initiated by me during or before 1917. 

On my taking over the command early in 1915 the Staff of the Admiral 
at Dover consisted of two flag-lieutenants, a secretary, and two clerks. 
The dockyard—a development of the War—was under Mr. A. D. Short- 
ridge, the Director of Works, with shipwright and engineering foremen 
under him. The Sixth Destroyer Flotilla, which was based on Dover, 
was commanded by Captain Charles D. Johnson, the Captain of the 
Attentive. ‘The drifters were in charge of Captain Humphery W. Bowring, 
and the trawlers commanded by Captain Vansittart-Howard. The 
examination service in the Downs was administered and commanded 
by Captain G. N. Tomlin. 

Soon it became apparent that an increase of staff was necessary. 
Captain Bowring was appointed my Flag-Captain—the Admiralty refused 
to appoint him a Chief of Staff, on the plea that he was too junior ! 
What that had to do with his appointment, I never could understand. 
He did the work of Chief of the Staff; and, in the only war of a life- 
time, surely red tape of this description might have been ignored. It 
was not until a Captain junior to him, on the East Coast, was made a 
Commodore that the Admiralty consented to his being recognised as 
Chief-of-the-Staff. Again, what this had to do with his qualifications was 
not apparent. Queer to relate, his successor, Captain E. R. G. R. Evans, 
was also subjected to the same quaint restriction. To us at Dover at 
war—very much at war—these absurd peace methods were incomprehen- 
sible and galling. 

In Captain Bowring I had a tower of strength. He combined hard- 
headedness with the knowledge of a seaman (not so common as might 
be thought by some persons), and he was well liked by all, in spite of a 
sternness of manner, which is always a good thing in an officer in a 
position of command. It was much to my regret that he left Dover to 
take up an independent command in the autumn of 1917. He was suc- 
ceeded by Captain E. R. G. R. Evans, C.B., of Antarctic fame, and known 
to the public from his share in the Swift and Broke encounter with enemy 
destroyers. I had watched him during the period of my command and 
selected him for his sterling qualities. In Paymaster-Commander Walter 
Cask, my Secretary, I was also extremely fortunate. On many occasions 
in my absence he had to act on my behalf and always did so with judgment. 
Lieutenant R. P. Keigwin remained on as Interpreter Flag-Lieutenant, 
and was a valuable assistant ; finally Lieutenant Llewellyn V. Morgan, 
who subsequently became my Flag-Lieutenant and signal and wireless 
telegraphy expert, was a great assistance to me. 

As the gunnery exercises increased, I felt the necessity of having a 
gunnery commander, and with great difficulty extracted one from the 


we we 


z a es LS 


HISTORICAL 33 


Admiralty, but only by taking Commander G. R. B. Blount out of the 
Revenge, a ship under my orders. I was, however, fortunate in my choice. 

The shadow of the requirements of the Grand Fleet was over every- 
thing. The efficiency of that bulwark of the country was rightly con- 
sidered to be of paramount importance, but we did want a few crumbs at 
Dover! We had a most difficult réle to play, and it was necessary that 
we should have officers of high qualifications, even if one or two were 
juggled from the Grand Fleet. 

A navigating officer was a necessity to carry out the chart preparation 
of the sailing time of the transports and a multifarious number of similar 
navigating details. I was, indeed, fortunate in obtaining Commander 
J. S. G. Fraser, whom I cannot praise better than by saying that in all 
the hundred and one things he did he never once made a mi 

My office was badly under-staffed in officers. In order to ensure 
secrecy, I made it a rule that every operation-order was to be typed by an 
officer. I had a big tug-of-war with the Admiralty to get the number of 
secretarial officers increased. No R.N. officers were available, and I 
begged without success for an R.N.V.R. officer. At last I succeeded, but 
only by telling the particular authority at the Admiralty concerned, that 
his refusal meant my sitting up at night typing my own orders. I do not 
mention these tussles in any carping spirit; but the Admiralty can be 
improved by war experience as well as any other body or individual. I 
hope that leaving this criticism on record may perhaps aid the judicial 
spirit of those who may have to allot officers to the various theatres in a 
future war. 

Later on, as work increased, other officers were added—Captain 
H. C. J. Grant for intelligence duties. Captain C. L. Lambe—capable and 
level-headed—as head of the Air Service, and a scientific Flag-Lieutenant, 
Lieutenant E. D. Hercus, who was of much assistance to me. I am glad 
that Dover was the first place, and I feel honoured that I was the first 
Flag Officer to have a scientist officially allowed on his staff. Lieutenant 
Trelfall came to take charge of the smoke experiments : Commander Bick- 
ford was detailed for mounting guns. And so the staff increased, never 
redundant in individuals, and all with their special functions, which 
they fulfilled most efficiently. 

Engineer-Captain Parsons was practically my Engineer-Captain, 
although really appointed in charge of the machinery of the Sixth Flotilla. 
His work is a record of achieving the impossible by keeping efficient the 
overworked Sixth Flotilla, more especially the ‘‘ 30-knotters,”” which 
should have been on the scrap-heap before ever the War started. In war- 
time old material is better than none at all. This was our usual alternative 
at Dover during the early days of the War. | 

Enough has been said to indicate the skeleton of our organisation, which 
will be expanded more fully later on. 7 


36 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


because the approaches to a Naval base can be mined by submarines, 
mine-sweepers are required to keep the offing swept and the channels of 
egress free from these lurking dangers. 

When, therefore, we say that a battle fleet is held fast in a certain port 
by the threat of the possible exit of a fleet in being, we refer not only to the 
battleships, but also to the cruisers, destroyers, and other auxiliary 
vessels which, for the time, are immobilised and not available for service 
in other localities. 

A “fleet in being ’’ knows no such limitations. The Commander-in- 
Chief is free to use any, or all, of his cruisers or smaller craft every day 
in the year. He knows his day of exit, and he can have his vessels recalled, 
reconditioned; and ready for service. The only deterrent to their use 
for raiding purposes is the fear that, should they incur considerable losses, 
these may subsequently handicap the defence of his fleet in a general 
engagement. But should he have decided, as seems to have been the case 
with the German Fleet in the late War, never to issue forth to court a 
general engagement, such a consideration has no weight. He, though 
inferior in battleship power, is able to raid and create general havoc with- 
out risk to his fleet, while similar action is denied to his stronger antagonist. 

These are the considerations which, indirectly, caused the Dover Com- 
mand to be of great importance during the earlier stages of the War. With 
the battle fleets stalemated, the conduct of active operations passed 
to the smaller vessels and subsidiary theatres of war. Commerce destroy- 
ing and its protection became the main work of the Allied Navies. England 
was to be starved into submission. The famine strategy of Napoleon 
Buonaparte once more occupied the stage; but, owing to modern inven- 
tions, totally different means were to be employed to effect the end in view. 

During the Napoleonic wars the “ continental system ’’ was invented 
by the Emperor as a means to close all European markets to our manu- 
factures. This was countered by the British Government insisting on all 
cargoes en route to the Continent, whether carried in neutral or friendly 
ships, being first landed in England and there paying duty, before reship- 
ment to their destinations. Our command of all seas and over all natures 
of vessels on them enabled this to be done. Economic pressure in the end 
forced Russia to abandon the Napoleonic alliance ; the invasion of Russia 
resulted, and Napoleon’s doom was sealed. 

In those days we had, comparatively speaking, few overseas markets. 
Such colonies as we possessed were largely undeveloped. The United 
States had recently become a separate nation, and had started a merchant 
fleet. For these reasons our exclusion from the markets of Europe con- 
stituted a grave threat to us of financial ruin. We, however, survived ; 
and, in the end, gained largely; for the stress occasioned by our com- 
mercial isolation caused a large expansion of our trade with our colonies. 
We were forced into the position of being the general export country for 
world supply. Mechanical aids to manufacture were then in their infancy. 
These we were forced to develop, consequently our iron and coal production 
increased at a far greater rate than was possible in the war-devastated 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS. 37 


countries of Europe. We thus gained an ascendancy in trade which was 
not seriously challenged during the next fifty years. 

In the late War these conditions no longer existed to the same extent. 
Continental Europe was largely self-supporting. The United States was 
our close rival in the markets of the world; but, as ever, our financial 
stability depended on our foreign trade. ‘‘'This heel of Achilles ” became 
the target for German attack, and in one particular we were at a greater 
disadvantage than in the old wars, for the submarine had introduced a 
new feature into Naval warfare. Although we held command of the 
seas so far as surface vessels were concerned, we held no such command 
against submarine attack. 

Before the War the danger of submarines attacking our merchant fleet 
had been pointed out and debated in the Press ; but some, myself among 
the number, were of opinion that submarine warfare against commerce 
was a two-edged weapon. The submarine could not easily distinguish 
between neutral vessels and those owned by the Allies. Few countries 
were in a position to flout neutral opinion, and, if great care was not 
exercised, a belligerent country might well find other countries entering 
the war against her. This is what happened to Germany. The lure of 
submarine attack on our shipping proved to be the will-o’-the-wisp which 
drew her to her doom, for it forced America to join in the War on the side 
of the Allies. 

Germany had the choice of fighting our Grand Fleet or of keeping that 
fleet immobile by using her own battle fleet as a threat. She chose the 
latter, and she may have been wise ; but where she made the great mistake 
was that, while keeping her main fleet “in being,” so as to paralyse 
our battle fleet and its large quota of auxiliaries and destroyers, she did not 
use her destroyers and commerce raiders like a rapier to make lightning 
thrusts at that vital point—our merchant navy. She chose the stiletto of 
the submarine ; too weak, and too short in reach, to inflict really vital 
blows on our sea-borne trade. She would not wager the restraining power 
that her fleet had on ours by risking a severe defeat at sea. Yet having 
made this decision she kept her destroyers intact at their full strength, 
and idle, in order to fulfil a réle that the German Naval authorities had 
no intention of ever permitting them to carry out. 

The result was that she lost the War. If she had mustered every 
destroyer and light cruiser that she could lay hands on, and had hurled 
them at our fleet in the van of her own fleet in one bold and determined 
rush to close and sink ship for ship, trusting to her destroyers and their 
torpedoes to equalise battleship numbers, it is conceivable that she might 
have won a fleet action ; for she had the advantage that her vessels had been 
built to fight and not to live in; they were, therefore, more unsinkable 
than ours, which were constructed for all-world service. At all events, she 
might have come out of the fight with equal honours, and with a prestige 
which would have raised the morale of her Navy to the highest point. 

On the other hand, she might have made feints of her battle fleet putting 
to sea, so as to keep our destroyers tied to our Grand Fleet, while using 


36 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


because the approaches to a Naval base can be mined by submarines, 
mine-sweepers are required to keep the offing swept and the channels of 
egress free from these lurking dangers. 

When, therefore, we say that a battle fleet is held fast in a certain port 
by the threat of the possible exit of a fleet in being, we refer not only to the 
battleships, but also to the cruisers, destroyers, and other auxili 
vessels which, for the time, are immobilised and not available for service 
in other localities. 

A “‘ fleet in being ’’ knows no such limitations. The Commander-in- 
Chief is free to use any, or all, of his cruisers or smaller craft every day 
in the year. He knows his day of exit, and he can have his vessels recalled, 
reconditioned, and ready for service. The only deterrent to their use 
for raiding purposes is the fear that, should they incur considerable losses, 
these may subsequently handicap the defence of his fleet in a general 
engagement. But should he have decided, as seems to have been the case 
with the German Fleet in the late War, never to issue forth to court a 
general engagement, such a consideration has no weight. He, though 
inferior in battleship power, is able to raid and create general havoc with- 
out risk to his fleet, while similar action is denied to his stronger antagonist. 

These are the considerations which, indirectly, caused the Dover Com- 
mand to be of great importance during the earlier stages of the War. With 
the battle fleets stalemated, the conduct of active operations passed 
to the smaller vessels and subsidiary theatres of war. Commerce destroy- 
ing and its protection became the main work of the Allied Navies. England 
was to be starved into submission. The famine strategy of Napoleon 
Buonaparte once more occupied the stage ; but, owing to modern inven- 
tions, totally different means were to be employed to effect the end in view. 

During the Napoleonic wars the “ continental system ”’ was invented 
by the Emperor as a means to close all European markets to our manu- 
factures. This was countered by the British Government insisting on all 
cargoes en route to the Continent, whether carried in neutral or friendly 
ships, being first landed in England and there paying duty, before reship- 
ment to their destinations. Our command of all seas and over all natures 
of vessels on them enabled this to be done. Economic pressure in the end 
forced Russia to abandon the Napoleonic alliance ; the invasion of Russia 
resulted, and Napoleon’s doom was sealed. 

In those days we had, comparatively speaking, few overseas markets. 
Such colonies as we possessed were largely undeveloped. The United 
States had recently become a separate nation, and had started a merchant 
fleet. For these reasons our exclusion from the markets of Europe con- 
stituted a grave threat to us of financial ruin. We, however, survived ; 
and, in the end, gained largely; for the stress occasioned by our com- 
mercial isolation caused a large expansion of our trade with our colonies. 
We were forced into the position of being the general export country for 
world supply. Mechanical aids to manufacture were then in their infancy. 
These we were forced to develop, consequently our iron and coal production 
increased at a far greater rate than was possible in the war-devastated 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 37 


countries of Europe. We thus gained an ascendancy in trade which was 
not seriously challenged during the next fifty years. 

In the late War these conditions no longer existed to the same extent. 
Continental Europe was largely self-supporting. The United States was 
our close rival in the markets of the world; but, as ever, our financial 
stability depended on our foreign trade. ‘‘ This heel of Achilles ’’ became 
the target for German attack, and in one particular we were at a greater 
disadvantage than in the old wars, for the submarine had introduced a 
new feature into Naval warfare. Although we held command of the 
seas so far as surface vessels were concerned, we held no such command 
against submarine attack. 

Before the War the danger of submarines attacking our merchant fleet 
had been pointed out and debated in the Press ; but some, myself among 
the number, were of opinion that submarine warfare against commerce 
was a two-edged weapon. The submarine could not easily distinguish 
between neutral vessels and those owned by the Allies. Few countries 
were in a position to flout neutral opinion, and, if great care was not 
exercised, a belligerent country might well find other countries entering 
the war against her. This is what happened to Germany. The lure of 
submarine attack on our shipping proved to be the will-o’-the-wisp which 
drew her to her doom, for it forced America to join in the War on the side 
of the Allies. 

Germany had the choice of fighting our Grand Fleet or of keeping that 
fleet immobile by using her own battle fleet as a threat. She chose the 
latter, and she may have been wise ; but where she made the great mistake 
was that, while keeping her main fleet “in being,” so as to paralyse 
our battle fleet and its large quota of auxiliaries and destroyers, she did not 
use her destroyers and commerce raiders like a rapier to make lightning 
thrusts at that vital point—our merchant navy. She chose the stiletto of 
the submarine ; too weak, and too short in reach, to inflict really vital 
blows on our sea-borne trade. She would not wager the restraining power 
that her fleet had on ours by risking a severe defeat at sea. Yet having 
made this decision she kept her destroyers intact at their full strength, 
and idle, in order to fulfil a réle that the German Naval authorities had 
no intention of ever permitting them to carry out. 

The result was that she lost the War. If she had mustered every 
destroyer and light cruiser that she could lay hands on, and had hurled 
them at our fleet in the van of her own fleet in one bold and determined 
rush to close and sink ship for ship, trusting to her destroyers and their 
torpedoes to equalise battleship numbers, it is conceivable that she might 
have won a fleet action ;_ for she had the advantage that her vessels had been 
built to fight and not to live in; they were, therefore, more unsinkable 
than ours, which were constructed for all-world service. At all events, she 
might have come out of the fight with equal honours, and with a prestige 
which would have raised the morale of her Navy to the highest point. 

On the other hand, she might have made feints of her battle fleet putting 
to sea, so as to keep our destroyers tied to our Grand Fleet, while using 


38 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


hers for the secondary purpose of raiding the Channel. On their return 
they would have been again ready to work with their fleet and keep it an 
efficient threat to our Grand Fleet lying at Scapa Flow. 

The German Naval authorities (we must call them by this cumbersome 
term as there were no less than three authorities all wrangling over the 
control of the German Navy), however, had no clear-cut policy. They 
wavered and failed lamentably, always trying to believe that, by using 
submarines illegitimately, they could avoid a clear strategical decision as 
to the use of the major armaments. So far as we were concerned, we had 
so many uses for our destroyers—scattered to combat submarines and as 
escorts to troopships and men-of-war—besides having to keep a very 
large number with the Grand Fleet, that it was not to the advantage of 
our Navy to force destroyer actions unless we were certain of success ; 
further, it was not to our advantage, so long as we remained largely inferior 
in the available numbers of destroyers, to force any destroyer actions, 
provided the enemy did not use his destroyers to attack our interests. But, 
with the traditions of the Navy behind us, and with the ineradicable 
conviction that we could always knock the enemy more than he could knock 
us, it was too much to expect that either captain, commodore, or admiral 
would follow a course so antagonistic to Naval inclination and teaching. 
Still, care had to be exercised in the use of the vessels, a care wisely fostered 
by the Admiralty in the case of the Dover Command, by not filling up 
losses in destroyers as they occurred, which course brought the Admiral face 
to face, in a very practical manner, with the necessity for husbanding his 
resources, especially as destroyers were the vessels that he could least spare. 

It was here that the enemy mistook altogether the grand game which op- 
portunity had afforded him—a game which might have reduced this country 
to the verge of starvation. Had he built and pushed out armed raiders, at the 
same time using his submarines legitimately ; had he concentrated and 
attacked with his destroyers our shipping in the Channel, on the east 
coast of England, and in the Downs, our Admiralty would have been 
on the horns of a cruel dilemma. We should have been forced to dissipate 
cruiser strength abroad and also to keep a large destroyer force at Dover. 
Where were these boats to come from? ‘There were only two possible 
sources—the Grand Fleet and submarine hunting. Hence, inevitably the 
fighting efficiency of the Grand Fleet as a whole would have been impaired, 
convoys would have had to be instituted and the destroyers taken off 
submarine hunting. The insult of the enemy sinking vessels with surface 
craft, in daylight, off our coasts would have been greater than the country 
would have stood. One or two really large raids on our shipping, and the 
Admiralty would have been forced to keep a large force of light cruisers 
and destroyers in the south, to protect our shipping in the Channel— 
as useless for the general purposes of the War as those which were tied to 
the Grand Fleet at Scapa Flow. 

The German Navy, however, appeared to have been devoid of sea 
instincts. Most Naval operations are to a great degree governed by instinct, 
and instinct is a matter of heredity. Germany shewed clearly by her 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 39 


general attitude that her ideas were military rather than naval. Ashore, 
war is a science, and a great deal more of an exact science than at 
sea—reconnaissance, intelligence, reliable information, and such hard 
facts govern with accuracy dispositions and attacks on land. At sea, 
conditions are always in a state of flux. Speed of movement in any direction, 
difficulties of obtaining accurate knowledge, varying weather and sea 
conditions often make it essential to act merely on a surmise—and to be 
always prepared to find that, at any moment, the conditions have changed 
from those that were expected. 

The one marked characteristic of the enemy was his disinclination to 
lose a vessel. Now, in every Naval engagement or undertaking, vessels 
are more or less certain to be lost. The only critical test of a projected 
undertaking is whether the object to be gained justifies the probable 
loss. Ashore, the enemy never hesitated to lose men ; but at sea he would 
not risk a vessel; the result was that he educated his men to run away. 
This, not improbably, was due to the military instinct of hating to lose 
materiel. ‘“* Saving the guns ” has always been a tradition among armies. 
This principle applied to sea-fighting would be apt to lead to a feeling of 
disgrace in losing ships, for the German Navy was really governed by 
military and not by Naval tradition. Several opportunities occurred when 
the Germans could have snatched a considerable success from us in the 
south at really insignificant risk, yet they made no attempt which was not 
handicapped by an overpowering desire to see their vessels safely back into 
port. At first, this feature upset all calculations; at last, it became quite 
annoying. But it was, in reality, the salvation of our shipping. ‘Truly, 
we all longed to change places with him and play the game over again, 
with our Sixth Flotilla and Commodore Tyrwhitt’s splendid flotillas, 
Ostend, Zeebrugge, and Bruges serving as bases; and as targets the 
Downs with its shipping, the cross-Channel transports, the shipping 
routes on both coasts and with Dunkirk, Calais, and Boulogne inviting 
blocking operations. Such an array of objectives appeared to us to be 
a gluttonous surfeit. We ourselves, on the contrary, had nothing as an 
objective since, for reasons that will be explained later, it was not advisable 
to block Ostend and Zeebrugge against the entry of large vessels. 

Now the strategical position at Dover was one of interest but of con- 
siderable difficulty to the Admiral. The waters of the Dover Patrol 
extended from the Scheldt to the North Foreland, and from Beachy Head 
due south to the French coast (see Chart of Patrol), it formed a 
water area of about four thousand square miles in extent. The vital 
front that had to be protected every night was fifty-five miles long, with 
Nieuport and the Allies’ lines on the extreme right, the harbour of Dunkirk, 
then twenty miles of trade route along the north coast of France to Calais, 
then twenty miles across the entrance to the Channel, past which com- 
merce raiders or destroyers might slip through, then on the extreme 
left lay the Downs, with entrances both to the north and south, in 
which anchorage eighty to a hundred ships lay at anchor day and night. 
For the Germans to attack this host of valuable vessels was for the 


40 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


destroyers only a matter of two hours’ full speed steaming. Ostend and 
Zeebrugge were only sixty-two and seventy-two miles respectively from 
Dover harbour, the nearest point on the English coast; while Dunkirk 
was only twenty-three miles from Ostend. 

At the very commencement of the War the Downs had been selected 
as the examination ground for all vessels passing either up or down the 
Channel. About a hundred and twenty ships passed Dover daily in 1915 
and 1916, and between eighty and a hundred per day in 1917. All of 
these in passing anchored in the Downs. Had the Channel traffic been 
suspended, or even largely reduced, London would have starved, and it 
would have been necessary to remove immediately at least one third of its 
population to the west coast of England, since the railways were quite 
unable to deal with the food trains that would have been required to make 
up for the loss of sea transport. 

The traffic to and from Dunkirk had to be sedulously maintained, as 
this port was the main feeding base of the northern parts of the British 
and French Armies. 

There were therefore three main vulnerable objectives should the enemy 
have made a determined strike at our shipping: the Downs, the trade 
route near the English coast, and the trade route near the French coast ; 
the latter including the twenty-three mile stretch of coast trade between 
Calais and Dunkirk, which was flanked for the whole distance by open 
North Sea. In addition the Straits had to be defended so as to stop 
raiders passing down-Channel to the Atlantic. Submarines had to be 
stopped when possible, but at all events rendered powerless to attack our 
shipping in the Narrows, and our coasts had to be guarded against the 
gun-fire of raiding vessels. Furthermore, the left flank of the Allied Army 
had to be defended against sea attack, and especially against a force landed 
behind our advanced lines. In this connection it should be remembered 
that the Downs and the left of our Army on the coast were no less than 
fifty miles distant from each other. Incidentally, such operations as were 
possible to assist our troops in an advance on the Belgian coast had 
to be undertaken when required ; and, in addition, whenever an offensive 
was initiated by our armies in the south. We were required to make every 
endeavour to attract troops to move north by feinting landings on that part 
of the coast which was occupied by the German Army. Finally, such 
operations had to be carried out against Ostend and Zeebrugge as would 
incommode those places and make them unsuitable for bases, and the 
waters in their vicinity made difficult to the navigation of enemy vessels. 

In order to recognise thoroughly the difficulties of the position it must 
be appreciated that in the south, as with our Grand Fleet in the north, the 
‘* initiative ” lay entirely in the hands of the Germans—that is, it was open 
to them to attack any objective on any day or night that suited them 
with the whole or such part of their forces as they might wish ; whereas we, 
having these objectives to defend and none to attack, had to dispose our 
available forces so as every day and every night of every year to guard 
the whole of the most vital of the objectives. Obviously, in order to safe- 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 4! 


guard all our interests, the force at Dover should have been a large one ; 
as a matter of fact, it was phenomenally small. For purely defensive work, 
as distinct from such vessels as might have been lent for offensive operations 
agamst the enemy’s coast, we had during the whole of 1915, and the greater 
part of 1916, only twenty-four destroyers, six only of which mounted 
4-inch guns, the remainder being armed with 12-pounders. On account 
of refits not more than three-quarters of these were present at any one time 
in the Patrol; so that, allowing for the necessary rest of the officers 
and crews, only three 4-inch boats and six 12-pounder boats were available 
at any one time on patrol; and, taking breakdowns and losses mto 
account, even that number was rarely available. Towards the end of 
1916, and in 1917, these numbers were increased by a few destroyers and 
an occasional division of five or six good 4-inch boats lent from Harwich. 
Against us, at Bruges and Ostend, there were constantly a varying and, 
to us, unknown number of large enemy boats, each mounting three 4-inch 
guns. On one memorable occasion, owing to collision and minings, our 
force of 4-inch destroyers in the Dover Patrol was reduced to one single 
boat, the Amazon ; so that I had to make dummy signals by wireless tele- 
graphy to the boats that were absent in order to make the enemy believe 
we still had a few destroyers in the Straits. 

The principle I always acted on was to represent our position to the 
Admiralty and leave to them the question of sending additional destroyers. 
They, with full knowledge of the whole requirements of the Navy, knew 
what they could, or could not, spare in the way of destroyers from other 
work ; and it was my business to do the best I could with such forces as 
I had and not to grumble. But, it was onerous work, since, m case of the 
enemy carrying out operations successfully against us, it would have been 
impossible to explain to the British public that we had about one-eighth 
part only of the least force reasonable for the defence of the Straits ; 
since that piece of information would have been invaluable to the enemy. 
The position was, therefore, from the point of view of the Admiral, not 
an enviable one, since we never were in a position to guard all services and 
localities ; but, at the same time, it was more exhilarating to eke out such 
forces as might be available and to feel that much was being done without 
the Dover Patrol denuding the other Naval requirements of the country, 
and weakening the protection necessary for the other main arteries of 
our shipping. 

In arranging the strategical distribution of the defence, it was, in the 
first place, necessary to decide which were the most vital of our interests. 
Two predominated over the others—our shipping, and holding the Straits 
against raiders trying to slip through. The stoppage of submarines 
could only be effected by efficient mines, of which we had none until the 
end of 1917; the only available alternative was the erection of barrages, 
which could only deter but not prevent those vessels from passing down- 
Channel. The possibility of the enemy landing on the French coast 
could be met, though feebly, by our monitors ; and, while we could not 
ignore the possibility of night raids by destroyers firing blindly at the coast, 


42, .THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


the damage caused by such raids was bound to be so microscopic compared 
with what would result from a serious attack on our shipping, that it was 
not too much to expect from our civil population that they would endure 
such trials with fortitude and patience, supported by the knowledge that, 
after all, since the country was at war, they must expect some chance 
encounters with the enemy. Doubtless much of the bitter criticism directed 
against the Dover Patrol during my period of command would have been 
silenced if it had been possible to explain our lack of vessels and the dis- 
position of our slender forces ; but, of course, that was impossible. The 
Germans would have liked nothing better. 

The strategical position of the Dover force at night was, therefore, 
one of defence ; and was arranged with the following points in view : 


(1) Defence of the shipping in the Downs. 

(z) Prevention of raiders breaking through unobserved. 

(3) Support of our anti-submarine look-outs and destruction of 
submarines. 


To effect this, the cross-Channel transports were run entirely by day 
and coaled and rested at night. The Channel traffic was passed close up 
each shore, so that each line had one flank only to be protected. These 
arrangements cleared the way for the three main objects of the defence. 

The main difficulty in disposing our destroyer force lay in the balance 
of opposing requirements. To fight the German destroyers, the boats 
should have been concentrated, say, in a single division of 4-inch boats ; 
but to detect, follow, and hang on to the skirts of enemy destroyers, or 
raiders, proceeding down-Channel, it was necessary for them to be 
separated and spread across the Channel, in order that at least one of their 
number should be somewhere near the smaller, slower look-out vessels 
that might have sighted an intruder. 

Of course, the sighting of vessels at night was bound to be one largely of 
luck. A glance at the diagram (p. 43) will show this. The black mass 
represents the water space at the entrance of the Channel. The white 
circles and elipses show the areas visible at any one time to our patrols 
on a dark night. The patrols shown are those available in 1917, during 
our most palmy times as regards destroyers, when we had a maximum 
number of these vessels. 

Whenever possible, I arranged to have a force actually in the Downs, 
where the greatest number of merchant ships lay, so that no time would 
be lost by our destroyers in getting there. The chances were that four 
boats on the spot could engage and delay eight of the enemy, and so hamper 
them (even if they themselves were sunk) as to prevent much damage to 
the shipping until further assistance arrived. Under no condition of 
attack elsewhere were these boats allowed to leave the Downs, as such an 
attack might be merely a feint to entice them away and leave the shipping 
at anchor open to attack. A division of flotilla leaders, or good boats (at 
the most two flotilla leaders and four large boats), patrolled off the South 
Goodwin ready to support either the Downs or the Channel Patrol. 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS "4g 


And a cross-Channel patrol of four boats was maintained between Dover 
and Calais, with a patrol in the vicinity of Folkestone. 

It was only as late as 1917, and then only very rarely, that our number 
of destroyers allowed such patrols to be maintained, even when all the . 
boats resting were turned out on patrol for the four or five dangerous hours 


Diagram illustrating the Sighting of Vessels at night. 


of the tide, namely, when the tide was running strongly and the static 
defences less dangerous. 

In the early years of the War four Tribal class destroyers and two 
“* 30-knotters ” held, and patrolled, the Straits against all contingencies, 
the remaining small destroyers were employed to assist the shipping on the 
trade routes. 

It will be seen that the task of defending every point was therefore 
impossible. The Downs anchorage was guarded jealously during the whole 
of the War. Over 100,000 vessels passed the Downs during 191 5-17, and 


44 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


only one vessel was ever subjected to attack between the Goodwins and the 
coast, and that one had anchored in an exposed and prohibited anchorage. 
When raids did come, and nothing material was achieved by the enemy, 
it was, to those who knew our difficulties, a matter for sincere con- 
gratulation that the narrow waters had been held for two or three years 
without any significant losses, by a force largely inferior to that which 
the enemy was able to bring to bear. Instead of being congratulated, 
however, the Patrol, and especially the Admiral, was marked out for abuse. 
This abuse appeared somewhat ludicrous to us, knowing as we, and the 
Admiralty, did the very slender screen between us and a disaster of great 
magnitude, which the tireless work and the unremitting vigilance of all 
concerned alone was able to avert. 

Later on, this subject will be dealt with more fully, and more details 
given of the patrols, the magnificent work done by the vessels, and the 
sacrifices that were incurred by the crews in defending the narrow seas 
and the shipping for three long years, summer and winter, day and night, 
gale and fog, always in inferior force, always superior in courage, endurance, 
and tenacity. 

The function of the Navy, as a force protecting the left flank of the 
Army, deserves detailed consideration. There was a reasonable probability 
that the enemy might land a force between La Panne and Nieuport. 
The Allied lines passed practically through the east outskirts of 
Nieuport, and cut the sea about a quarter of a mile to the eastward 
of the Nieuport Canal entrance. If a force had been landed some 
three miles to the westward of this line, between it and Dunkirk, 
the whole of the guns of the French defences would have been 
taken in the rear. If a frontal attack had been made on Nieuport at 
the same time there could only have been one ending—namely, the 
Allied defences being pinched through and road communication estab- 
lished between the German Army in Belgium and the landed force. The 
enemy could then have advanced, taking the left of the Allied line in rear, 
and, pivoting on Dunkirk, established his left as near as possible to Ypres. 
The coast right up to Calais might have fallen, as it was merely a case 
of which side could rush up troops the quicker. 

Such a landing scheme was perfectly feasible, indeed, it was almost 
identical in principle with, but far easier in detail than, the scheme so 
nearly carried out by us in 1917. The essentials were for the enemy to 
build in Germany 300 flat-bottomed barges of special design, propelled 
by petrol engines, each capable of carrying about 200 men ; 300 such boats 
would have carried 60,000 men. These could have practised embarking 
and disembarking on inland waters in Germany, and been gradually 
passed, free of all observation, up the Flanders canals ; their heavy trans- 
port moving up by road to the coast. On any suitable day, when it was 
too cloudy for air observation, the barges could have been passed into 
Ostend ; and, leaving at night by divisions, have covered the small distance 
of eight miles which lay between Ostend and the landing-place. The 
sea passage would only have occupied two hours. The barges would have 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 45 


been run straight ashore and stranded over a mile front. The great feature 
of such an attack would have been that no subsequent sea communication 
would have been necessary, as the nip through of the line at Nieuport 
would at once have opened up road communication with the main force. 
A scheme of such a nature was possible and deadly, since no warning of 
the attempt would have been given, and therefore no steps could have 
been taken to frustrate it before the actual alarm was given. This pos- 
sibility necessitated our having some force always on the spot to take instant 
action—not that any force that we could have kept available could have 
prevented a sudden dash—but even with a small force it would have been 
possible to create confusion and delay the operation. 

A monitor with one “ 30-knotter ” as escort, therefore, was anchored 
off La Panne every night when the sea rendered a landing possible. 
She was supported, when circumstances permitted, by a division of the 
barrage destroyers nine miles off at Dunkirk. The orders given to 
the monitor were to beach if torpedoed, and become a fort to punish the 
landing force. The destroyers were to charge right into the barges, not 
paying any attention to enemy destroyers, but to ram, sink, and bombard 
the craft carrying troops. | 

Looking back, it seems rather extraordinary that we were able to anchor a 
monitor and a “‘ 30-knotter ’’ night after night for two years within fifteen 
miles of Ostend on the open coast without them once being molested. 
My chief fear for them was not so much torpedo attack, since the bulges 
of the monitor were some protection, but a deliberate boarding from a 
fast armed merchant vessel. It would have been a delightful cutting-out 
expedition to have attempted, and might well have succeeded, considering 
the small numbers of the crew carried by a monitor, and the element of sur- 
prise. The risk on our part was thus considerable, but it had to be taken. 

The coast to the westward of Dunkirk was not so liable to attack, 
since the distance from the lines at Nieuport was too great. It would 
have entailed landing guns and transport on the beach. I had no fears 
for this portion of the coast unless Dunkirk were taken by the enemy. 

In case of an advance by the Allied troops in Belgium, the only assistance 
that we of the Dover Patrol could afford was by our monitors firing on 
places where the enemy’s reserves might be collected. A monitor force 
at Dunkirk was always ready to assist in this manner in case of attack 
by the enemy. Generally speaking, the old short 12-inch guns of the 
monitors were too inaccurate to knock out individual guns ashore ; their 
chief value lay in bombarding areas. 

In 1916 and again in 1917, a day patrol was kept up off the whole length 
of the Belgian coast, only twelve miles from the shore. This will be more 
fully dealt with later, but strategically it was of considerable importance, 
since it denied the whole of the offing of the coast to the enemy in the 
day-time except the strip of territorial water near the Dutch coast. The 
whole length of the patrol line was flanked with mine-nets and mines, 
so that a formidable barrage extended from Dunkirk to the territorial 
Dutch waters, as may be seen clearly in the general chart of the patrol. 


46 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The value of the patrol line was considerable, as it enabled us to place 
and maintain buoys at definite geographical localities along the whole 
length of the coast. These were invaluable as jumping-off spots for opera- 
tions; moreover, on every suitable day in 1917, firing was undertaken 
against Ostend and Zeebrugge without warning being given to the enemy. 
Alas, the weather often prevented this being successfully done, but Ostend 
was abandoned as a Naval base after July 1917, entirely as a result of the 
bombardments. This was fully supported by photographic evidence, 
as after this date no vessel was ever seen inside Ostend harbour. 

An enemy attack on Dunkirk, Calais, or Boulogne with a view to 
blocking the harbour to prevent the passage of merchant vessels was 
also a strategical possibility. Dunkirk lying so close to Ostend absolutely 
invited such an attack, especially during 1915, and the early part of 1916, 
before the night entry of merchant vessels into this port was stopped. 
Although the offing of the port was largely flanked by shoals, still, at high- 
water there was at least eighteen feet everywhere—quite enough to give 
passage to a blocking ship. The most amateur blocking would have 
sufficed to close the port to merchant traffic. It was the same with Calais, 
the defence of which against this form of attack will be detailed later. 
As regards Boulogne the blocking of the port would have required far 
more adventure, and I considered that it was reasonably safe from such 
attention. This also applied to Dover itself. A genius in command at 
Ostend would probably have attempted blocking both entrances to Dover 
harbour simultaneously ; it was feasible in misty weather, and would have 
caused us considerable inconvenience. 

Attack by gun-fire on our coasts should, of course, have been dealt with 
by local batteries. Too many other interests were at stake to waste des- 
troyers in defence of ploughed fields and gardens. But what a valuable 
asset the enemy possessed if he had used such attacks to draw our patrols 
away from the Downs, which should have been their real objective ! 
British Naval officers for generations to come will mournfully regret, and 
the shades of Naval officers of past ages will moan over the thought, that 
possibilities such as were presented to the Germans, fell to their Navy 
and not to our own. 

Another operation of strategical interest was the task that fell to the 
Patrol of keeping enemy troops on the Belgian coast during the first 
days of a push by our Army down south. The extreme difficulty in carry- 
ing this out lay in making the enemy believe that we really intended to 
land ; since, obviously, a landing should be a secret, swift blow without 
apparent preparation ; whereas, to cause him apprehension we had to 
exhibit our preparations in a more or less glaring way. This will be dealt 
with later, but one instance may be recorded to show the spirit of the Patrol. 

To give the enemy a fright during one such period, and to give a 
wakeful night to several thousand men, I sent Commander Evans of the 
Viking’ with two small torpedo-boats, off Ostend, to fire two bouquets of 
a hundred rockets each to give the military command something to think 

> Now Rear-Admiral E. R. G. R. Evans, C.B., D.S.O. 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS ag 


about ; at the same time I cheered him up by telling him the Viking, 
his boat, was too valuable to risk, therefore the torpedo-boats were more 
suitable! Of course, the real reason was that at high-water the shallow- 
draught torpedo-boats were immune against mines. All went well until 
the boats turned and made for home ; then his companion boat broke down, 
and could only steam at thirteen knots. Evans reduced speed and kept 
company, almost at once receiving a signal from the rear boat that they 
were being followed by four large destroyers. As it was impossible to 
run away without leaving the rear boat to be captured, and having a torpedo 
armament, the signal was made to prepare to engage the enemy with 
torpedoes. Offence being in this case the surest defence, the leader turned 
to engage, and discovered that what had been reported was, in reality, 
Ostend pier, showing its red lights, which, looming through the faint 
funnel-smoke, had been magnified to look like destroyers. 

Immediately the leader turned again to his own course, and Evans said 
to the Sub-Lieutenant, “ Signal T.G.” ‘‘ What is T.G.?” said the 
mystified Sub. ‘ Thank God,” said Evans. 

The one thing above all others that we hoped for was an advance by 
our troops on the Belgian coast. By ourselves, we of the Patrol could do 
nothing towards taking and holding the Belgian ports. We appreciated 
that the Flanders coast was the only strip of territory which the enemy 
had in his possession that was of direct and vital interest to this country. 
If the War had ended and peace ensued, with this in the possession of 
Germany, Great Britain would have been in a position which many 
wars in the past have been fought to avoid. With Flanders in German 
possession, Holland would have been isolated from the Continent, ready 
at any moment to fall like a ripe plum into the lap of Germany, and then 
the whole coast from Wilhelmshaven to Nieuport would have been German 
territory. For this reason every endeavour was made by us to facilitate 
an advance by our Army should such an offensive be undertaken. Heavy 
guns were transported from England to the Front and special arrange- 
ments for landing on the coast perfected, but our expectancy suffered 
severe rebuffs, and the work of months was in the end wasted by the 
advance of our Army being held up on the Passchendaele Ridge, which 
caused the abandonment of the coast-landing. 

A further possibility against which we had to guard was a raid by the 
enemy’s large cruisers on the Channel. This was always a possibility. 
The objects of such a raid would have been : 


(1) To cheer up the civil population of Germany. 
(2) To encourage our pessimists. 

(3) To raid our shipping. 

(4) To damage Folkestone and Boulogne. 

(5) To damage Dover. 


For the German cruisers a raid on the Straits of Dover was an easy 
matter. There was nothing material to prevent their doing so, but they 
had to consider how they were to get back. It was the difficulty in 


48 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


getting back to their harbours that was the great deterrent to an operation 
of this sort. 

Against such a raid we had practically no defence. The mine-field* 
was, at all events, but a chance, since fast sweepers, steaming ahead of the 
cruisers, could have cleared a channel through it. Our submarines were 
of little use against 25-knot ships. Destroyers were only of use at night, 
or to keep track of the ships in the day-time. The defence of the ports of 
Boulogne and Calais against day blocking operations could only be under- 
taken by our ancient submarines, who might have sunk the blockade 
ships prematurely before they reached the harbours, Dover harbour 
could be annoyed, but it is doubtful if any military damage could have 
been done to it—bar blocking the entrances—a difficult, if not impossible, 
thing to do thoroughly in a hurry, but one that, even if half done, would 
have caused considerable inconvenience. 

The force required for such a raid would not have been large. Speed 
was the great essential. Fast liners, one to block each port, one fast 
armoured cruiser to keep off small cruisers, two small cruisers, and a divi- 
sion of destroyers to deal with submarines, would have been ample. The 
whole operation would have been comparatively simple. 

The remedy was to have one or more large cruisers always at anchor 
in the Middle Deep* or Dover. Any boy can run round a corner and throw 
a stone at his neighbours’ windows with a good chance of breaking them, 
but he does not score much if he is caught when running away. The 
safe return was the great deterrent to such a raid, especially to a mentality 
like that of our enemy at Naval Headquarters. 7 

Now that the various functions of the Dover Patrol have been sketched 
out, it is well to emphasise again the fact that practically all our difficulties 
were caused or intensified by our lack of destroyers and efficient mines. 
German destroyers could be dispatched with considerable secrecy from 
Wilhelmshaven to the Belgian coast during a single night, so that any 
morning might bring an accession of force preponderatingly greater than 
ours. This especially applied to our defensive work in the Channel and 
to our force on the patrol-line off the Belgian coast, which, in the early 
morning, might have been rushed by unexpected numbers. Only once 
was this attempted, and then only half-heartedly, and it failed owing to 
the Patrol having rigidly complied with the orders issued for all units, 
in the early morning, to keep together ; but the menace was ever present. 

It is easy to blame pre-War administration for our deficiency in mines 
really dangerous to submarines and in destroyers, but to do so is not fair. 
No one foresaw the peculiar conditions of sea-warfare that would be 
forced on us, any more than anyone foresaw the vast supply of munitions 
that proved to be necessary on land. Had a dozen thinking Naval officers 
been asked, in 1913, if Dover would be a base of great importance in a 
war with Germany, the majority would unhesitatingly have said “‘ No.” 
Of moderate importance? ‘‘ Yes.’’ But not for one instant would it 


1 The large mine-field laid early in the War to the eastward of the Narrows. 
* A safe anchorage in the estuary of the Thames. 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 49 


have been given a place as that of second importance to the Grand Fleet 
in the Naval commands in home waters. The reasons are not far to 
seek. First, the military occupation and retention of Belgium was never 
anticipated. Trench warfare such as we have seen, which caused all 
land advance to fail for three years, has been a revelation. The stagnation 
of military advance on either side was undreamed of. It was, therefore, 
never anticipated that the Germans could hold the Belgian coast long 
enough to establish and protect its Naval bases with heavy batteries of 
considerable magnitude, and by this occupation be in a position to flank 
our East Coast trade route, and threaten the English Channel trade routes 
at close quarters. 

It must be remembered that the national purse has to be drawn on in 
moderation for Naval preparations in peace time, and that all increase in 
ships and vessels has to be defended in Parliament on the score of necessity. 
No one was gifted with sufficient prophetic insight in the years before the 
War to adumbrate the conditions that arose in 1915 and 1916 with their 
accompanying heavy demand for destroyers. Nor would such a prophet 
have been received with much honour. 

Wisely, the Admiralty devoted their annual grant largely to the provision 
of battleships and cruisers, and by so doing saved the country. Destroyers 
during the decade before the War were improved and built in numbers 
sufficient for the needs that were foreseen ; perhaps, indeed, the margin 
was run a bit fine, but who could have defended the expenditure in peace 
time of another {30,000,000 on destroyers ? 

With mines it was a different matter; our mines were designed for 
use against ships ; their use in anti-submarine defence was not anticipated. 
They were fairly efficient for the purpose for which they were intended, 
but the Germans had a far better mine. This was primarily due to the 
deep-rooted objection in the Navy to the use of electricity in contact 
mines, if it were possible to avoid it, owing to the troubles usually met 
with, such as weak batteries, bad contacts, etc. The Admiralty for this 
reason laid down as a maxim that the use of electricity was not permissible 
in Naval contact mines. The Navy preferred a mechanical to an electrical 
firing device, and it was because of this prejudice that a thoroughly 
efficient weapon was rejected and an inferior one adopted. 

In 1916 I urged the use of mine barrages both in the Dover Straits 
and also in the North Sea ; that is, vertical walls of mines with the mines 
moored at different depths, so that a submarine passing submerged through 
the area occupied by the mine-field stood a good chance of striking a mine 
at whatever depth it ran. But the mines then existing were of little value, 
and if laid in the best position for such a mine-field, would have blocked 
that area for subsequent use when the new pattern was ready. There 
was no such objection to laying the old pattern mines from the Good- 
wins to the Ruytingen to reinforce the net barrage, which we did; but 
the Folkestone—Gris-Nez line was reserved for the new mines when they 
should become available. 

There was, in fact, only one means of preventing submarines passing 

D 


50 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


the Straits ; namely, by a mine-field of fourteen lines of mines at seven 
different depths, each line being duplicated, so as to double the number 
of mines at each depth. Submarines could on any day in the year dive off 
the Goodwins before arriving in the Dover area and run at twenty fathoms 
right down well past the Folkestone—Boulogne line ; there was nothing 
to reveal their presence, and no means of stopping them, bar mines. It 
was the barrage planned in February 1917 by me that eventually stopped 
them. The mines for this barrage could not be supplied till November 
1917, and the whole mine-field was almost completely laid by December 
31st, 1917. My Chief of the Staff, Captain Evans, was left behind with 
my successor to complete, according to my plan, such mine-laying as 
was not finished. Had these mines been supplied in February all sub- 
marines would have been stopped passing through the Straits before the 
end of May 1917. 

I devised special lighting arrangements and dispositions of the Patrol. 
These, as will be shown later, were departed from by my successor and 
the Barrage Committee, with the result that the value of the mine-barrage 
was considerably reduced—and a raid was made possible which caused the 
loss of eight vessels and eighty-nine men killed, wounded, or missing. 

It will be seen from the above that the Dover Patrol was no command 
for an admiral who valued his contemporary reputation as distinct from 
the reputation history might subsequently assign him. While strategic- 
ally at an immense disadvantage, he was tactically largely inferior in force. 
It was the only Naval command daily and nightly in close touch with the 
enemy. It had vast interests to safeguard, of which the defence of the 
more important only could be attempted with the force available. Any 
night the enemy could, after secret preparations, have swept the whole 
Dover force off the face of the sea; the number of vessels required to 
prevent this was so large, so impossibly large, that the risk had to be 
accepted. At the same time, so urgently were destroyers required for 
other duties that the least number possible to defend the really vital in- 
terests of the Straits had smilingly to be accepted. Not a word, not a 
whisper of our inferior numbers could be allowed to escape to the Press, 
because this would have benefited the enemy. The result was the facts 
which underlaid the whole situation were unknown to the country. The 
more the Press slated the Admiral for inefficiency, the more insistently 
they asked “‘ What the Admiral at Dover was doing ? ” the better and the 
greater service they were unconsciously rendering to the country, since 
their vituperations gave the enemy to believe that I had a large force at 
my disposal—a misconception I was only too glad for them to hold. 
Our reply was, ‘“‘ Let them come again, one day they will be caught and 
punished.” This defiance was likely to make them careful, and less likely 
to attempt any really great offensive which we were not in a position to 
defeat. In fact, bluff was the keystone of our immunity. The German 
was a logical thinker up to the point of viewing every action of ours in the 
light of what he, under similar circumstances, would have done, and not 
what our temperament would cause us to do; this was his absolute 


STRATEGICAL CONDITIONS 51 


undoing ; this was our great asset. How could he, the military thinker, 
believe that the Straits of Dover were,-at one time, held by one 4-inch 
destroyer while he had, or could any night have had, a dozen or more in 
the Belgian ports ? How could he detect that the boats to which dummy 
wireless telegraphy signals were being made were repairing at Liverpool, 
Portsmouth, Southampton, and Chatham, and not in the Patrol ? How 
could he believe that we would institute a day blockade of the waters of his 
coast within twelve miles of his ports when we had insufficient destroyers 
to hold the Straits ? He saw the magnificent display of borrowed cruisers 
and destroyers on the barrage patrol line shortly after it was laid; he 
probably argued that these were in reserve and within reach. How could 
he tell that the hundred trawlers anchored off Dunkirk in 1916 were 
virtually unprotected ? And so on. Had his temperament been one of 
action, had he argued, blindly and simply, “‘ There’s an enemy, let’s go 
for him,”’ which any day a new officer in command might have done, our 
game would have been up. 

The inhabitants of the east coast of Kent grumbled at having an 
occasional five-minute bombardment. Only eight civilian deaths were 
caused by destroyer raids. I much regretted this loss. As, however, 
important information would have been given to the enemy, it was 
impossible to say, ‘ Which would you rather have, eight casualties 
and four houses damaged, or that the country should lose six million 
pounds’ worth of shipping and three thousand seamen? Moreover, I 
have not sufficient destroyers to protect both Folkestone and Ramsgate 
against lightning bombardment, so if you are really filled with anxiety, you 
will have to toss up with Folkestone which of the two shall be protected.” 

Again, I was constantly being worried by people who should have 
known better because submarines passed through the Straits. The 
Intelligence Department at the Admiralty was one of the worst sinners 
in this respect. My answer was, “ Supply me with the necessary mines, 
and I will stop them!” To the arm-chair official at the Admiralty 
and the commands further west, who did not know the waters of the 
Patrol, this naturally savoured more of an excuse than a reason. Events, 
however, justified my confident forecast that my method of mining the 
Straits would stop the submarines when sufficient mines were supplied 
to me. No person, even at that time nor since the War, has ever made 
a rational suggestion as to how, otherwise, they could have been stopped. 

So daily and nightly dispositions were made, and risks taken with 
inward congratulation in the evening that nothing untoward had hap- 
pened during the d.v, and in the morning that our shipping had been 
protected during th. night. With all tactical and strategical odds against 
us, the Admiral had one superlative asset in the magnificent personnel, 
officers and men, under him. I never had one moment’s doubt that, 
come what might, the personnel of the Patrol would slash such a scar 
across any enemy operations when once in contact with him, that the Navy 
would emerge with glory from any offensive that the enemy could bring 
against us, 


GERMAN STRATEGY 


You thought to win by trickery and methods underhand— 

The teachings of sound strategy you could not understand, 

We filled the sea with commerce, our fleet held yours at bay, 
You might have waged a gallant war ; you chose the other way. 


You never learned the lesson that sea-war has always taught, 
That alone by losing vessels sea-supremacy is bought, 

Each nation that has striven, has paid down in full the fee, 
By unstinted loss of warships for the mast’ry of the sea. 


You thought to win against us by the bogey of the raid, 

You thought that such futilities would make our breed afraid ? 

You thought you’d break the morale of our mercantile marine, 

That you’d keep them cowed in harbour by your mine and submarine ? 


Had you kept our Grand Fleet busy, had you swept the Channel bare, 
Had you flooded distant oceans with your raider and corsair, 

Had you not embarked on murder, had you kept within the rules, 
You’d have done your work far better and made use of cleaner tools. 


Had you stirred your sailors’ courage, had you taught them to believe, 
What had oft been done by others they could equally achieve, 

Then the world’s brave deeds your seamen would have striven to transcend 
And have saved the vile dishonour of your Navy’s bitter end. 


52 


CHAPTER III 
SHIPS OF THE PATROL 


Battleships—15-inch monitors—The Marshal Ney—12-inch monitors—g-2-inch 
monitors—Light cruisers—Torpedo gunboat—Tribal destroyers—3o0-knot 
destroyers—Kite balloon ships—Trawlers—Minesweepers—Drifters—Sub- 
marines—Aeroplane carrier—S.S. airships. ) 


T may be advisable at this early stage to give a very brief description 
] the various vessels of the Dover Patrol, so as to enable the reader 

to understand their different functions. There were twenty-four 
distinct classes of fighting vessels in the force, and the variety was a 
measure of the diversity of the functions of the Patrol. Incidentally, this 
variety did not, as might have been expected, increase the difficulties of 
the Command, but simplified them, much as the equipment of a work- 
shop with a variety of special machines facilitates manufacture. 

How can anyone who knew each and all, as well as I did, choose 
between them? Monitor, M.L., destroyer, drifter, trawler, etc. As the 
recollection of the months of fine service passes through the mind a host 
of incidents crowd the memory and render choice invidious, It is best, 
therefore, to take size as the order for description and to avoid any 
decision which, while fair to the one, would be unfair to the remainder. 

First and foremost we had in the Patrol the Revenge (Captain V. B. 
Molteno), afterwards called the Redoubtable when the new battleship the 
Revenge was commissioned ; and, classed with her, was the Venerable, the 
ship that temporarily relieved her. The Revenge was an obsolete battle- 
ship fitted with water-tight compartments, exterior to and below the 
water-line of the ship, commonly called “ bulges.” They served as an 
exploding screen to Whitehead torpedoes. She had two turrets each 
with two short 13-5-inch guns, relined and reduced in bore to 12-inch ; 
these guns had a range of about 16,000 yards. She was also armed with 
a 6-inch battery having a range of about 13,000 yards. The range of 
both could be increased by heeling the ship over to increase the elevation 
of the guns. This expedient had, however, the disadvantage of exposing 
the hull below the water-line on the attacking side, which gave a chance 
of her being holed below the belt. A more unsuitable vessel for coast 
work could not be imagined ; her draught of water was 29 feet, far too 
much for close navigation among the shoals and mine-fields. 

In spite of these disabilities the Revenge figured in several operations ; 
and, in addition, was of the greatest value in carrying out firing trials in 
the Thames, on which the whole structure of our subsequent long-range 


53 


54 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


firing was based. So that her association with the Patrol was one of value 
and benefit to us. She suffered from one other defect: she had the 
prestige attaching to a battleship which, while valueless in increasing her 
services, would have reflected undue glory on the Germans if they had 
succeeded in sinking her. 

Of 15-inch monitors there were four : the Marshal Ney and the Marshal 
Soult, and, later on, the Erebus and the Terror. ‘The first two joined the 
Patrol at the beginning of 1916 and were a distinct improvement in gun 
range over the 12-inch monitors, as 25,000 yards could be obtained 
instead of 21,000. Unfortunately they were too slow for our work, only 
about five knots being generally obtained. Five knots in waters where 
ordinary tides of three knots against the ship are often met with, does not 
mean rapid travelling, nor does it aid navigation among shoals ; moreover 
their steering was atrocious. It was not uncommon on the banks off the 
Belgian coast for one of these ships to swing eight points, or 90 degrees off 
her course, and neither helm nor propeller would easily persuade her to 
return to her proper course. 

These monitors did useful work with their guns as will be narrated 
later on, but they, especially the Marshal Ney, provided the Patrol with 
excitement and amusement. Good old Ney! with her cheery captain, 
Captain Hugh J. Tweedie! How we missed them both afterwards ! 
Reliability both in officer and in ship is the first thing that an Admiral 
values. The Marshal Ney judged by this standard was a hopeless sinner ; 
but her officers and men made up for her deficiencies. Her engines 
infrequently exploded when asked to start ; her engine-room was scarred 
as if by shrapnel from the fragments of burst cylinder heads ;_ while the 
escapes of the engine-room staff were miraculous. Her chief engineer, 
Mr. Swan, stuck to the engines like a Trojan and almost overcame their 
bad habits ; really, when talking to him, you were almost converted to the 
opinion that just one little alteration would ensure their starting next 
time the ship was required for service. When they did not burst, they 
usually would not start, and when once started, no one liked to stop them 
for fear of not being able to start them again. But, without exaggeration, 
' the more they burst and the worse they behaved the more Mr. Swan 
loved them and the more cheery Captain Tweedie became. 

On one occasion, before the days of smoke-screens, when we were 
firing at the observation stations and military headquarters at Middel- 
kerke, a German battery, the Tirpitz, took us on, but at almost extreme 
range, so fortunately the fire was only moderately accurate. The Ney 
was specially marked out by the battery for its attention, so I ordered her 
to weigh. This she did, and started her starboard engine. The port 
engine, however, refused to move; then her helm jammed itself hard-a-star- 
board ; so she commenced turning a series of circles. The supply of 
compressed air for engine starting ran short, so it was unwise to stop the 
starboard engine as that engine was working the air compressor. Round 
and round she went in the tideway, quite out of control, unable to start 
the port, and afraid to stop the starboard engine, with the Tirpitz 11-inch 


SHIPS OF THE PATROL 55 


shells just missing her, until the Viking, Commander Edward R. G. R. 
Evans, was ordered to come to the rescue and tow her. This she did in 
good style, covering the operation with a dense cloud of smoke from her 
funnels. The Marshal Ney then retired ignominously back to Dunkirk, 
in tow of the destroyer, at twice her normal full speed. 

A sense of humour quite made up for such minor annoyances. In the 
early days before the extent of enterprise on the part of the enemy could 
be gauged, the monitors, including the Ney and Soult, always berthed at 
night inside Dunkirk harbour. Each passage in and out of the narrow 
shallow entrance presented possibilities of untoward happenings; but careful 
handling, anchors, and an element of luck saved the wooden estacades! 
on all but one occasion. Eventually the Marshal Ney was paid off to turn 
her turret over to one of the new 15-inch monitors and to have her engines 
radically altered. In the early part of 1917 she returned to the Patrol to 
act as guardship in the Downs, the merchant ship anchorage, with a 
good armament of 6-inch guns. Her advent was characteristic. Off 
Dungeness she met an easterly gale and a westerly tide, and signalled 
that she was helpless and in danger of grounding on Dungeness. If, 
however, she kept the sea on her port bow, I knew that the tide would 
take her clear of the point ; so to cheer up her new captain, who evidently 
did not know her peculiar habits, I wirelessed to him that “‘ he was all 
right,”’ and that “the Marshal Ney usually navigated the waters of the 
' Patrol sideways.”’ As a protection to the Downs she was of considerable 
value. 

The Marshal Soult had far more reliable engines. But her steering was 
bad and her speed slow. In fact, on the advent of the Erebus and Terror, 
being loath to lose two additional 1 5-inch guns, I used to have her towed 
by one of these to the offing of the places we were going to bombard. It 
was a cumbrous method of going in and out of action, and with a more 
active enemy would hardly have been justifiable. Moreover, it reduced 
the speed of the whole squadron, which, on short summer nights, when 
long trips across the North Sea had to be made, was a distinct disadvantage. 
Her guns were good. Her captain, Captain William D. Paton, and after- 
wards Captain G. Ronald B. Blount, and her officers and men were keen, 
so that in spite of her shortcomings she was a valuable unit. 

The Erebus and Terror were the two great assets of the Patrol for bom- 
bardment purposes during 1917. A maximum speed of fourteen knots, and 
twelve knots when steaming comfortably, was an absolute luxury. "The 
secondary armament of two 6-inch Q.F. guns was poor, especially as the 
least range of the 15-inch was about 2000 yards; so that, if rushed by 
destroyers, either of these ships had merely one 6-inch gun on a broadside 
to rely on. During the preparation for the great landing in 1917, of which 
I shall have more to say, the whole of the patrol work fell on these two 
vessels, and splendidly they did their arduous tasks, as well as the more 
congenial duties of bombarding Ostend and Zeebrugge. It is impossible 

* Estacades are the wooden piers built out to sea flanking the dredged 
entrance to narrow harbours. 


56 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


to convey the relief that was afforded to me by having two ships that 
could be relied on to navigate in any weather. Both had serious mishaps. 
The Terror with three torpedoes exploded in her forepart, and the Erebus 
mined amidships by an electrically controlled boat; but both survived, 
monuments to modern naval scientific construction. The Terror was 
commanded by Captain Charles W. Bruton and the Erebus by Captain 
Charles S. Wills. 

We had five 12-inch monitors. The Lord Clive was commanded by 
Commander Norman Carter, and afterwards by Captain Bernard St. G. 
Collard, the Prince Eugene by Captain Ernest Wigram, the General 
Wolfe by Captain John A. Moreton, the Prince Rupert by Commander 
Harold O. Reinhold, and the General Craufurd by Commander Edward 
Altham. These formed the backbone of the fleet for bombardments 
during 1915, and for the patrol off Ostend and Zeebrugge during 1916 and 
part of 1917. 

Their various activities will be detailed in the later chapters. 

The 9:2-inch monitors were numbered M 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 
(see Appendix). ‘They were queer craft. Originally each had a 9:2 short 
gun, but these I got changed for either a 6-inch or a 7-5 single gun. They 
steamed about nine knots, nominally ten, drew only six feet of water, and 
handled well; their engines were generally reliable, but they rolled ! 
When her 92-inch gun was still on board, the M 25, while in the mouth 
of the Thames at anchor, rolled 180 degrees in ten seconds, that is, she 
made two complete rolls of 45 degrees each way, each occupying only 
five seconds. I daresay most of my readers have been in a ship which 
rolled, and the majority of them have not liked it; but anything like this 
speed and amplitude of movement must be unknown to them. So 
great was the velocity of the roll that the 3-pounder cartridge-cases were 
thrown almost vertically out of their boxes into the air. But in this life 
we cannot have everything ; so, if vessels have to be of abnormal design 
for definite purposes, all kinds of work cannot suit them, and it is the 
business of the Admiral to use them under legitimate conditions. Sea 
life is, however, so tricky and uncertain that, at times, circumstances 
will arise which necessitate using special ships for general purposes, and 
then it is that their bad points are brought out. 

These vessels were mainly of use in protecting the larger monitors and 
destroyers on the patrol line from destroyer attack ; for which purpose 
their guns, with a longer range than those of the enemy destroyers, and a 
quicker rate of fire than the 12-inch guns of the monitors, were very 
valuable; for our destroyers’ guns were outranged by those of the 
German boats, and therefore the latter made a practice of annoying our 
boats at long range. One quaint little action took place on a foggy day 
among the shoals, between, on the one hand, M 26, M 27, and two of our 
small ‘‘ 30-knotters,”’ armed with 12-pounder guns, and on the other four 
German boats armed each with three 4-inch guns. After a short action 
the Germans withdrew, at thirty knots’ speed. Had they rushed our 
vessels, they would have had a good chance of bagging the lot; especially 


SHIPS OF THE PATROL 57 


as the rate of fire of their 4-inch guns was far greater than that of the 6-inch 
weapons of the smaller monitors. 

The light cruisers Attentive, Active, and Adventure were of use in back- 
ing up the destroyers on patrol. In the Straits they were too vulnerable 
to torpedo attack to make it safe to use them promiscuously. The Adven- 
ture, Commander Edward O. Gladstone, and Foresight, Commander 
Herbert Garnett, left the Patrol early in the summer of 1915, and sub- 
sequently the Aftentive, originally Captain C. D. Johnson, then Com- 
mander Neston Diggle, and the Active, Commander Kerrison Kiddle, 
did all their special work. They were a valuable addition to the Downs 
defence, and on the Belgian Coast Patrol line. Later on, I succeeded in 
getting a 6-inch gun mounted on the Altentive’s fo’c’sle to outrange the 
Hun destroyers’ weapons, which was a valuable alteration to her armament. 

The Hazard, Lieutenant-Commander L. A. D. Sturdee, was a useful 
gunboat, used chiefly as mother-ship for the submarine boats when they 
worked in the Channel on alarms being given of cruiser raids coming 
south. Lieutenant-Commander Sturdee, a torpedo officer, was valuable 
to me as an experimental officer. All the early smoke experiments were 
carried out by him, and the progress made was largely due to his exertions 
and those of Lieutenant William B. Threlfall, R.N.V.R. 

The flotilla leaders Sewift, Commander Ambrose M. Peck, the Broke, 
Commander Edward R. G. R. Evans, and Faulknor, Commander Henry 
G. L. Oliphant, were comparatively late arrivals, but, indeed, welcome 
ones. It was the greatest comfort to have some fast vessels with superior 
armament to the German destroyers. I worked them mainly as an extra 
patrol in the Straits on all moonless nights. On one occasion two of them 
when so employed had a successful scrap with a German destroyer 
division, which will be more fully described when the doings of the Sixth 
Flotilla are dealt with. 7 

That brings me to the good old Sixth Flotilla, whose work was never 
advertised, but which did yeoman service during the three years. No 
flotilla in the Navy had such a time, such incessant work, such arduous 
work, or even such responsible work as these war-worn vessels. At the 
start there were twelve Tribals: the Afrid:, Amazon, Cossack, Crusader, 
Ghurka, Maort, Mohawk, Nubian, Saracen, Tartar, Viking, and Zulu, 
and twelve ‘‘ 30-knotters”” (for names of captains see Appendix I). 
The commanding officers changed often, and were moved up to better 
boats as opportunity occurred, so no captain can be specially identified 
with any particular boat, but only with the flotilla as a whole. Their duties 
were many and varied, and to detail them briefly is so impossible that a 
special chapter is devoted to this work. The only points that need here 
be emphasised are that the Tribals were old boats built about 1906. 
Their speed, though good, was inferior to the latest German boats. They 
belonged really to two distinct classes of six boats each, those mounting 
two 4-inch guns and those mounting four 12-pounders. The 12-pounder 
boats were, of course, useless to stand up against the German 4-inch boats, 
and our 4-inch Tribals mounted only two against the three guns of the 


58 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Germans. All round, therefore, they were inferior to the modern 
destroyers of the enemy, which, considering their age, was not to be 
wondered at. 

The “ 30-knotters ” dated back to about 1897 or 1898, so they were 
about sixteen years old at the beginning of the War. Their classification 
as “ 30-knotters ’’ was an absurd misnomer, twenty, and perhaps with 
some twenty-five, knots being their fine weather speed. They were fit for 
escort work and for patrol except when it was blowing a gale, but they 
were totally unfit to be out in winter weather in the Channel. However, 
in war time one cannot pick and choose, and at Dover I was glad to get 
anything that could steam and could float. 

The P boats were among the most successful of the war-designed, 
and built, vessels. They had a speed of twenty knots, carried one 4-inch 
gun, possessed geared turbines, and were of shallow draught ; they were 
very handy, good sea-boats, and were ideal light patrol vessels. Their 
light draught enabled them to patrol with greater safety than destroyers 
in unswept waters where mines might be lurking. They were sufficiently 
armed to be capable of taking on submarines. ‘They were also most 
valuable in certain operations on the Belgian coast for measuring distances 
by the use of a taut wire laid from a drum, as I shall explain in due course. 
They could keep the sea in any reasonable weather, of course, at reduced 
speed. They were thoroughly reliable, and their officers and men did 
good service. 

A word must be said about the kite-balloon ships. First the City of 
Oxford, Commander John Brown, then the Menelaus, Commander Charles 
McCullock, were sent for use in observing firing on the Belgian coast. 
They were large merchant vessels of considerable draught of water with 
a special hold forward which could take an inflated kite-balloon, and a hatch 
the full size of the hold. They were well equipped, but too large for work 
on the coast ;_ so, a barge, called the Arctic, was obtained to hold a balloon, 
which, when used, was transferred to and towed by a trawler. The 
general war conditions on the coast altered so rapidly and observation by 
aeroplane improved so vastly, that little opportunity occurred for the 
use of the balloons. ‘They, however, filled in a gap in the transition stage, 
and might have been called into active requisition if the Germans had tried 
to advance along the French coast. 

The motor launches, or M.L.’s for short, deserve special mention. 
They were a good example of a makeshift, hostility class of craft which 
were useful for most of the purposes for which they were not originally 
intended. What a gallant little flotilla they were ; and what wet, cold, and 
exposure their crews endured under Commander Hamilton Benn, the 
keen and skilled yachtsman who commanded them! Their good discipline 
and work were undoubtedly largely owing to his gallant example and fine 
leadership. Originally they were intended as patrol vessels. Well, there 
were places where they might patrol, but Dover Straits was not one of 
these. Rarely could they stand the sea in that locality. They originally 
were armed with old horse artillery 13-pounders, fitted toaship’s mounting. 


SHIPS OF THE PATROL 59 


Most of them, however, were eventually robbed of even this weapon 
in order to arm merchant ships, so that they were left practically defence- 
less in a fight with a submarine. They were about seventy-five feet long, 
with a twelve-foot beam, and had two petrol engines. Originally they 
had the noisiest of exhausts, enough to frighten a submarine miles off. 
The engine-room ventilators discharged around the captain and helmsman, 
enveloping them in most unpleasant fumes. But they did good work, as 
will appear later on. 

The trawlers and drifters are fully dealt with in subsequent pages. 
Their work was beyond all praise. 

The gunboats Excellent and Bustard were old gunnery tenders, originally 
sent for use on the coast, Commander Gerald Saurin and Lieutenant- 
Commander Owen H. K. Maguire being in command respectively. In 
the early days these vessels did good service ; but, with the increase in 
range of the enemy's coast batteries, and the development in accuracy of 
our fire from the monitors, they became obsolete for our purposes and 
were paid off. It was no good merely shooting into Belgium, which was 
all such small unsteady platforms were capable of doing. During 
their careers they had, however, many scraps with the Westende coast 
batteries. 

The mine-sweepers were of two distinct classes, trawlers and paddle 
vessels. The former were good sea-going vessels, and would sweep in 
any weather short of a whole gale ; but they drew anything from fourteen 
to eighteen feet, a dangerously deep draught for mine-sweeping. The 
paddlers were originally the ordinary shilling tripper boats of peace days, 
good only in fine weather, but then very useful. Later on the Racecourse 
Class, whose names were a refreshing reminder of peace and sport, became 
available. These again were all right in fine weather, but in a sea-way 
their paddle-boxes got choked with water and their speed fell off. 

These were succeeded by the Tunnel Class, or Dance Class. They 
were Called “Tunnel” because they had propellers in tunnels, which 
reduced their draught, and ‘“‘ Dance” because their names were those 
of dances. When the first of these was sent to Dover, everyone con- 
demned her as unseaworthy. I, however, was so impressed with the 
good points of this vessel, especially her shallow draught, that I sent 
her over to Dunkirk to work, under the lee, for progressive trials in various 
weathers with satisfactory results. These vessels were, later on, I believe, 
highly thought of. 

More will be said later of the coastal motor boats, the C.M.B.’s. They 
were very fast, small boats, which might be described as half boat, one 
quarter seaplane, and one quarter torpedo; they were of use for very 
special work only. 

The Dover submarines were, broadly speaking, C Class boats only ; 
one or two E Class were subsequently borrowed. Their work was much 
restricted by the peculiar conditions of the patrol. Their crews lived on 
board the Arrogant : Commander A. R. Palmer, and later Commander 
H. Spencer, of the London Fire Brigade, were her captains. This ship 


60 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


gradually developed into the depét ship of Dover harbour. When in 
Dover I flew my flag in the Arrogant. 

The Riviera was a seaplane-carrier. She was a ship that promised to 
be of great service ; but gradually lost in value, the truth being that the 
progress in aeroplane design and construction quite eclipsed seaplane 
design for reconnaissance and spotting work. The reasons are interesting, 
and are given lateron. The difficulty was to hit off weather when seaplanes 
could be hoisted out of the carrier and rise off the water ; many disap- 
pointments gradually led to the use of aeroplanes only ; and the Rrvtera 
left for other waters where she could be of greater service. 

The yachts attached to the drifters and trawlers did good work. For 
the drifters they acted as wireless stations and as links of communication, 
and did much the same service for the trawlers before these vessels were 
fitted with wireless. Of course, for defensive purposes they were useless ; 
but, at the same time, their size, in some manner, gave a feeling of support 
to the smaller boats. Psychology in war is not to be ignored. 

The armed boarding steamers at Ramsgate carried out the great work 
of examining all vessels passing through the Straits. They were for the 
most part small passenger steamers, or tugs, in peace time. They were 
well suited to their work, which was incessant. 

The last ship to note is the S.S. Airship, the smallest of our Naval air- 
ships. Of these airships, and afterwards of the coastals, we had several. 
They patrolled the air, observing the water from Dungeness to Boulogne, 
and the area between that line and Beachy Head to the French coast on 
a due south line. Their chief function was to keep submarines down and 
prevent them lying on the surface in this patch of water. This they could 
do by dropping bombs near them. It was a hundred to one against sinking 
them. Lieutenant Cunningham had originally the organisation of this 
force, and most ably carried out the work. 

Such were the vessels of the Dover Patrol, twenty-four different sorts 
of vessels, numbering somewhere about four hundred all told, each class 
having its own function. To an admiral in command of an area, like the 
Dover Patrol, in war time all vessels fall roughly into two classes, those for 
general service and those for special purposes. ‘The general service 
vessels, such as the 15-inch monitors, Tribal destroyers, and trawlers, 
could be used in all weathers, and for any duty within their capacity ; 
there was never any question as to whether they could or could not do their 
work. ‘The one quality an admiral demands in men and general service 
vessels is reliability. It is on their reliability that all his dispositions and 
plans are built. 

In the matter of small craft, we had far too few vessels to meet the 
manifold and conflicting demands of war, for war is a matter of hazards, 
but we were far better off in this respect than any of our Allies. In later 
months a large number of destroyers and special craft were turned out 
by the British yards to our great advantage at Dover. Were they of the 
exact types we required ? I can unhesitatingly say, that those designed 
and built in England during the War could not have been bettered ; 


SHIPS OF THE PATROL 61 


but many improvised vessels had to be used throughout the War. With 
the best endeavours on the part of the Admiralty, we were always short in 
numbers; but, as a sea officer, I never forgot the many preoccupations 
of the Admiralty, engaged in fighting in every sea, and especially the para- 
mount importance of maintaining the supremacy of the Grand Fleet. 

From experience at the Admiralty before the War I knew the impos- 
sibility of the Navy being kept fully equipped with vessels of all classes in 
peace time, and I never expected the Admiralty to supply me with all 
I wanted. If an admiral has all his wants supplied, command becomes 
simple. The training of a British sea officer teaches him to do the best 
with what he has, and to improvise that which he has not. This at Dover 
we had ample and incessant reason to do. If we had had more we might, 
perhaps, have done more ; but, as we had not, we did our best with what 
we had, and I did not grumble because the Admiralty had not achieved 
the impossible in peace time. 

In conclusion, we have much for which to thank the Constructive 
Department of the Admiralty under Sir Tennyson d’Eyncourt ; many 
were the vessels they devised and built for the Navy during the War. So 
far as Dover is concerned, I have nothing but gratitude to the Admiralty 
to record for the vessels they sent us, and all they did to meet our needs 
at a time when many demands were being made upon them. We tried to 
make the best use we could of whatever ships were sent to us, and when 
all is said and done, our vessels did very well, even when used for 
purposes for which they were never intended. 


THE MISCELLANEOUS FLEET 


At Dover we’d a splendid fleet, but not the orthodox 
Regulation fleet of war-time ; and some were rather crocks. 
When war broke out the R.N.’s most went to Scapa Flow, 
And the R.N.R.’s and V.R.’s came to Dover for the show. 
| To swell the Dover Patrol, my lads, 
To swell the Dover Patrol. 
But they had jolly good fun when the War had begun 
While they served in the Dover Patrol. 


We had monitors of M Class, and of twelve and fifteen inch, 
Which mostly steamed at six knots or seven knots at a pinch. 
There were little coastal motor boats and M.L.’s for the screen 
And P boats and the Hazard and the C Class submarine. 

All had a job in the Dover Patrol ! 

A tough time in the Dover Patrol ! 

A time, you may bet, that was rough, cold, and wet, 

At sea in the Dover Patrol. 


Of destroyers we’d the Tribals and the ancient thirty-knotters, 
We'd ships that carried kite-balloons and seaplanes for our spotters, 
We'd steamers armed for boarding to search for contraband, 
And drifters and torpedo-boats to lend a helping hand. 

They belonged to the Dover Patrol, 

Did good work in the Dover Patrol, 

It wasn’t all glory, but the commonplace story, 

Of hard work in the Dover Patrol. 


The drifters they caught submarines, the paddlers they were willing 
To drop their trade of making trippers seasick for a shilling 
To join the trawlers sweeping mines, and, aided by the yachts, 
Their harvest was a good one as the Channel yielded lots. 

Yes, they came to the Dover Patrol, 

To the risks of the Dover Patrol. 

Alas | many now sleep in the treacherous deep, 

That lies under the Dover Patrol. 


The different kinds of ships we had just numbered twenty-four, 
And we'd have had some others if there’d been any more. 
Four hundred ships they totalled in our miscellaneous fleet ; 
But there’s one thing I can tell you, they were precious hard to beat ! 
Beat ? Beat the Dover Patrol 
Who said beat the Dover Patrol ? 
The Hun couldn’t do it, no, not if we knew it, 
In our day in the Dover Patrol. 


62 


CHAPTER IV 
TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 


The subsidiary operations involved in traffic protection—The value of the fishing 
fleet—Distance swept by mine-sweepers—The dangers to traffic—Mastery 
over submarine attack—The danger of mines—The German mine—Method 
of mine-sweeping—Functions of the Trawler Patrol—Defence of the traffic 
zone—Attempt at Admiralty control—Convoy work—Submarine attack at 
night—Extinguishing navigational lights—H.M. crossing to England— 
Mining of Anglia—Captain Lamb of the S. D. Lambert—Synopeis of vessels 
lost—Accidents to trawlers—Salvage of the Volscian—Loes of the Ghurka— 
—Egqunox bombed—Mine-laying—The paddle mine-sweepers—Number of 
lives saved by the mine-sweepers—Losses in the mine-sweeping service. 


INCE the protection of the merchant shipping in the Straits 
S was the most important of all our duties, a description of the 

methods which we employed should be given the first place in the 
record of any work of the Patrol. The following subsidiary operations 
were involved : 


(1) The institution of a patrol off the Belgian coast to carry the offensive 

into aaa waters and to deceive him as to our strength in the 
el. 

(2) The construction of net barrages. 

(3) Hunting submarines. 

(4) Destruction of mine-fields. 

(5) The defence of the traffic line. 

(6) The escort and arrangement of the sailings of the cross-Channel 
troop service. 

(7) The defence of the anchorage in the Downs. 


As a commencement 4 and 5 only will be dealt with in this chapter. 
But, before proceeding with detailed explanations, let me say that it is 
doubtful whether the Allies could have defeated the Germans, at any rate, 
as quickly as we did defeat them, if it had not been for the assistance 
that the Royal Navy received from the fishing community, and the 
resources which this country possessed in ordinary fishing vessels and 
excursion steamers. 

Now that peace has come it is possible to attempt to convey an account 
of the wonderful work which was done by the trawlers and paddle-sweepers 
which were attached to the Patrol. These craft were never intended for 
war, and their skippers certainly had no premonition that the time would 
ever come when they would be shepherding merchant shipping ; sweeping 


63 


64 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


up mines laid by the enemy in the fairway ; or escorting the King, states- 
men, and generals across the Channel. But fate is apt to play queer 
tricks with most of us; and, although these men were called upon to 
undertake many duties which they had certainly never foreseen, they 
can, in looking back on the course of the War, congratulate themselves 
on having rendered the Nation and Empire conspicuous service in an 
hour of great emergency. 

Any account of the operations of the Dover Patrol during the period 
when I was in command would be incomplete if some attempt were not 
made to describe the work of these vessels, and to convey some idea of the 
high standard of seamanship and courage which their officers and men 
displayed. ‘They feared neither the forces of nature nor the powers of the 
enemy, but worked with fine devotion by day and by night, in summer, 
fogs, and winter gales, and thus assisted not only in preserving millions of 
tons of merchant shipping from destruction, but also in maintaining the 
essential lines of sea communication with our Army in France. In 
carrying out this vital work between 1915 and 1917 the Dover mine- 
sweepers swept a distance equal to twelve times round the earth. 

The Trawler Patrol was most ably commanded by Captain Vansittart 
Howard, a hard-working, accurate, and conscientious officer. In this 
duty he was assisted by Commander W. Rigg. 

The dangers which threatened the traffic were : 


(1) Submarine attack by day. 
(2) Submarine attack by night. 
(3) Destroyer attack by day. 
(4) Destroyer attack by night. 
(5) Mines. 


Very early in the War we completely mastered submarine attack by over- 
working our destroyers; and, by hunting unmercifully every periscope 
sighted, we made the Straits too hot for submarine activities on the part 
of the enemy. 

Submarine attack at night, when a submarine is used as an invisible 
surface torpedo vessel, was always a danger, and one which it would have 
been most difficult to defeat had it been systematically resorted to by the 
Germans, which fortunately was not the case; although one or two 
attempts of this nature were made by them. 

oe attacks by day we frustrated largely by the Belgian coast 
patrol. 

Destroyer attack by night was never tried by the enemy on a large scale ; 
had they done so they might have done incalculable harm. 

Lastly, we come to mines. These were the really great danger. Whereas 
only six merchant vessels were torpedoed during my period of command, 
fifty were mined. It will not, therefore, be out of place to describe the 
German mine and our system of destroying mine-fields, before dealing 
with the general dispositions for our defence of the merchant shipping. 

In 1900 Admiral Sir Henry Jackson and I were sent, by the Admiralty, 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 65 


to the works of the Ansaldo Company at Genoa, to inspect and report on 
the Elia blockade mine. We were much struck by the possibilities such a 
mine offered, not only against commerce, which may be classed as a 
strategical use, but also as a tactical measure to assist an inferior fleet in 
retirement. ‘The employment then generally forecasted for such mines 
was not so much against merchant vessels, as to block an enemy’s harbour 
and prevent the egress of their fleets ; hence the name “‘ blockade mine.” 
This name led to mines of this nature being viewed rather askance by the 
Admiralty ; since we, the strongest sea power, always fostered the idea 
that it was our business to tempt the enemy to come out and fight, and not 
to block himin. The younger school of Naval thought, however, visualised 
a wider use for this mine that that of mere static blockade. 

Constant experimenting with mines was carried out by the staff of 
H.M.S. Vernon, the torpedo school ship at Portsmouth, and an ingenious 
mine was evolved ; which, like the modern Elia mine, in no way depended 
on electrical apparatus, that class of apparatus having been officially ruled 
out so far as our Navy was concerned. It was this unfortunate decision 
which led to the mines in use by us at the outbreak of the War being inferior 
to those possessed by Germany. 

It is interesting to trace the reasons for this lack of efficiency in our mines. 
Twenty years before the War we had an electrical mine which exploded 
when it was bumped into—at least, it was intended that it should do so— 
but it often failed in this respect. The reason was that the mine contained 
a wet battery, a detonator, and a circuit closer; this last piece of 
apparatus consisted essentially of an air-gap in the electric circuit which 
could be bridged over, when the mine was struck, by mercury being 
splashed up and filling in the gap, thus completing the electric circuit and 
firing the detonator. The defects of this device were many, the mercury 
oxidised, the metal contacts corroded, and damp in the mine caused the 
battery to leak and run down. The Admiralty therefore decided that 
electricity was not to be used in our contact mines. A new mine, rather 
on the Elia principle, was devised, which, though efficient against heavy 
ships of fairly large beam, was practically inoperative against the more 
gentle push of the slow, narrow submarine. It was unfortunate that the 
future extensive use of this mine against submarine vessels was not 
visualised. The submarine entered very gradually into Naval armaments, 
and its use in large numbers and in waters where mine-fields could be laid 
was not foreseen. The result was that the mines which had been found to 
be efficient against surface vessels were adopted for general work, and the 
necessity for mines with special qualities for use against submarines was 
never recognised. 

The German mine was operated by electricity, but—and this is an im- 
portant point—it had no “ contacts,”’ that is, there were no gaps between 
metal surfaces to be bridged over in order to fire the mine. The Germans 
used a complete and unbroken metallic circuit from the battery to the 
fuse, and back to the battery again, and, in lieu of the gap, adopted a clever 
method of creating the electric current on the ship striking the mine. 


66 THERZCONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


An ordinary wet electric battery is not active, and cannot make electricity 
until a certain liquid is poured into it. The Germans put the battery close 
to the casing of the mine, and immediately over it, but outside the mine- 
case was a lead tube containing a glass cylinder. This glass cylinder held 
the liquid required to make the battery active. The operation of the mine 
was simple. These lead tubes, or “ horns,’’ as they are called, stuck out 
from the mines at convenient places. When a ship struck a mine one 
horn. was certain to be bent ; consequently the glass cylinder inside it was 
broken, and the liquid fell into the battery, at once making a current of 
electricjty and firing the mine. 

Both our own and the German mines had an apparatus which moored 
them automatically at a desired depth below the surface of the water ; 
but the Germans, in addition, introduced a simple contrivance which 
kept the mine at the bottom of the sea, close to its heavy circular anchor, 
for, normally, about twenty minutes after it had been laid. This was only 
useful when laying mines from submarines; it allowed the submarine 
laying the mines to get well clear of the spot before the mine rose to 
its predetermined distance below the surface. This apparatus was irreg- 
ular in its action, in fact, hours sometimes elapsed before the mine rose 
from the bottom ; and, occasionally, it required a whole gale of wind to 
shake it up and free it. Thus a device which was solely intended to protect 
a submarine from its own mines, became a great nuisance to us in clearing 
mine-fields completely, since we were never certain that one or more mines 
might not be remaining close to the bottom. 

In order to sweep up mines, a pair of mine-sweeping vessels dragged 
a wire between them through the water, which caught against the mooring 
ropes of the mines. Then one of three things happened. Either the rope 
broke a horn and the mine exploded, or the sweep-wire cut through the 
mooring rope and the mine floated to the surface; or thirdly, the mine 
and its sinker were dragged along by the sweep-wire. 

In the first case, that of the mine exploding, no harm was done except 
that the sweep-wire was cut through and another had to be got out. In 
the second case, if the mine came up and floated, it had to be sunk by gun- 
fire, and was often exploded in so doing. It was owing to the possibility 
of the mooring ropes of mines being cut that night sweeping was dangerous; 
floating mines could not be seen and destroyed in the darkness, and might 
subsequently be bumped by our vessels, or even the mine-sweepers 
themselves. The dragging of mines, as in the third case, constituted a grave 
danger ; since, unless great care were exercised, mines would be dragged 
from a known dangerous area up to either end of the channel which had 
been swept, and left, moored and dangerous, in water which was considered 
safe for navigation. Thus a new and unexpected danger-area might be 
created. For this reason each sweep made by the vessels was continued 
so as to end in water clear of the traffic line. 

Remember, all the above troubles had to be dealt with, not theoretically, 
not in calm, still water close to land ; but had to be mastered by fishermen 
in sluicing tides, in quite considerable seas, often in thick and misty weather 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 67 


when the land was not visible, when instinct alone could help them to 
estimate their position. 

It was just these practical difficulties, which were encountered daily, 
that so enhanced the results achieved by these men in my eyes, and those 
of practical seamen who knew the work which they daily accomplished. 
It is these very difficulties which are so impossible to explain to those whose 
lives are not passed on the sea, and who look on blue water merely as a 
nasty, uncomfortable inconvenience. These, who know nothing of the 
feel of a wet rope nor the cut to the flesh of a rubbed wire, nor the difficulties 
of navigation, can necessarily appreciate little of the hardships, or of the 
rough and ready calculations as to place, and the margins for error that 
must be allowed to keep, even approximately, a correct reckoning of the 
position of a slow-moving vessel in thick Channel weather, nor any 
other of the changes and chances of life on deep waters that go towards 
constituting practical experience at sea. 

The Trawler Patrol had three distinct functions to perform: traffic 
route protection, escort duties, and mine-sweeping. In the early months 
of the War the protection of the traffic routes was their main duty. When 
I took over the Command at Dover I found that the method that had 
been adopted of dealing with traffic was to pass the ships as far out to sea 
as possible, and only to allow them to approach the shore as they neared 
Folkestone. At this point it was necessary for them to keep close to the 
shore so as to avoid the large quadrilateral, Folkestone-South Goodwin-— 
Calais—Gris-Nez, which had been reserved for the drifters to work in. 
The fallacy of this method soon became apparent. Very little experience 
brought conviction that an area is more difficult to protect than a route. 
I therefore immediately took steps to alter the procedure, and, after a 
friendly tussle, the Admiralty approved my proposals; but this approval 
was given to the Dover area only. 

In discussing the matter with the Admiralty I pointed out that, so long 
as we allowed merchant vessels to roam broadcast over the sea, so long 
we would have an area, and not a line, to protect; so long as we sent 
escorts with special vessels, instead of defending a line, so long we should 
dissipate our available strength. In my view, the idea that vessels should 
be kept away from the headlands was entirely fallacious. “ ‘The argument,” 
I remarked, “‘ that submarines will turn up off the headlands and destroy 
ships is not worth a moment’s practical consideration. If the place where 
submarines collect is known, anyone in charge of patrols can deal with 
that area and the submarines in it.” 

Figures proved my contention in a most striking way. The total area 
of the patrol was about four thousand square miles, but by confining the 
traffic to a single line near the shore we had only an area of about four 
hundred square miles to defend. Moreover, this belt needed defence 
on one side only, the land side being practically immune from attack. With 
the exception of this narrow strip, the whole of the waters of the patrol 
to the westward of a line joining Folkestone and Boulogne could be left 
unpatrolled, for the simple reason that they were never used by any vessels. 


68 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Our protection of the traffic line consisted of pairs of armed trawlers, 
from three to five miles apart, with old type destroyers at every twenty- 
five miles to support them. These patrolled on the sea-side of the traffic 
line, and formed a most efficient hedge against submarine attack. In 
proposing the scheme to the Admiralty I pointed out that no defence is 
immune from attack by really bold and competent submarine captains ; 
but a defence of the nature of the one put forward would undoubtedly 
effect a considerable restraint on the average officer. A prophecy fully 
borne out by subsequent events, for no day attack was ever made by 
vessels of any sort on our shipping through this thin screen of defence. 
Submarines loathed the patrol vessels and their depth charges, much as 
a cat dislikes a terrier. If a cat sees a terrier in the offing it usually avoids 
that spot and passes by on the other side of the street. So with submarines, 
when they sighted our trawlers they took care to give them a very wide 
berth. Entries in the log-books of the captured submarines fully 
emphasised the aversion their captains had for the patrol vessels, and their 
dread of depth charges. 

Not only had submarines to be guarded against, but, after June 1915, a 
far greater danger had to be dealt with, namely, the mining of the trade 
route by submarine mine-layers operating at night. 

Submarine boats are so invisible at night time when slinking along the 
surface, and so inaudible when running under their electric motors, that 
they could practically go anywhere in the patrol at night time, and lay a 
mine-field where they liked without fear of detection. I remember in the 
1904 manceuvres, when I was in charge of the submarine flotillas, carrying 
on a conversation with the captain of a destroyer at night time without his 
ever seeing the submarine on which I was standing. 

Since any morning we were prepared to find that any spot in the patrol 
had been mined during the night, every inch of the traffic line had to be 
considered as dangerous until it had been swept. The problem we had to 
solve was how, in the face of this menace, we could safely carry on the 
traffic through the Narrows. 

In the years 1915 and 1916 we passed an average of one hundred and 
twenty ships daily along the traffic line. In 1917 we passed about one 
hundred daily. In addition we had to pass four sailings of three transports 
each across the Channel, keep the route between Dover and Dunkirk 
open, keep the trade route on the French coast open, and the Downs 
protected. This entailed sweeping approximately one hundred and 
twenty-five miles of trade route every day; and, as a single sweep in one 
direction only could not ensure that a sufficient width of safe channel had 
been secured, nearly double this total distance had to be traversed by our 
sweeping vessels. 

Certain young officers at the Admiralty, at one time, tried to run the 
traffic in the Narrows from Whitehall; and, not infrequently, ordered 
the stopping of traffic. To these orders I invariably paid no attention, but 
continued in my wicked way. For, taking a sensible view, by the time the 
Admiralty had been informed by me of the discovery of the mines, and 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 69 


the young officer concerned had consulted his chart, made up his mind, 
and the decision he arrived at had been sent back to Dover, all precautions 
had been taken and the traffic was proceeding normally. Unfortunately, 
however, a certain amount of confusion was created by this interference, 
for, occasionally, the order to stop traffic would, some hours later, reach 
ships passing through an adjacent patrol, when they were approaching 
the Dover area. These vessels would, in accordance with their orders, 
stop on entering the area, invite attack from submarines while stationary, 
and usually required some reassuring before again continuing on their 
journey. Traffic was thus delayed and danger incurred. 

Officers at the Admiralty should never be allowed to usurp executive 
functions. They have no first-hand knowledge of the weather and other 
local conditions. Their duty should be confined to the transmission of 
information and not to dictation, for their information must necessarily 
be tardy and incomplete. In the end this unfortunate procedure died a 
natural death. 

Until 1917 the mine-sweeping devolved almost entirely on the crews 
of the trawlers. After January of that year, paddle-mine-sweepers began 
to arrive, and their work was greatly facilitated ; but from the latter part 
of 1915 throughout 1916 these men and the trawlers (for a seaman always 
likes his ship to share any credit he may earn) did all the work, and faced 
all the dangers attendant on the destruction of the mine-fields. Let me 
record the fact that these vessels and their crews did magnificent work. 
Just ordinary fishermen, officered by men of the Royal Naval Reserve, 
none of whom before the War had meditated war employment, were 
suddenly called on to face grave danger and called on to discipline them- 
selves to meticulous obedience to instructions. Their work as fishermen 
had been individual ; when engaged on their ordinary trade they followed 
their own wishes and instincts; and it was no easy matter for them to 
accommodate themselves to control, and to carry out, in spirit and in deed, 
the orders which were issued to them. ‘The salvation of London, and 
perhaps the Empire, fell on the shoulders of these men, and nobly did they 
carry out the rdle assigned to them. 

Naturally, the first, and, in reality, the main difficulty was for them to 
detect if, and where, a mine-field had been laid. For it would have proved 
to be expensive if mine-fields had been discovered merely by merchant 
ships being mined. That only fifty-four ships were sunk by mines during 
these thirty months, during which four hundred mine-fields were located 
and destroyed, is sufficient evidence of the efficiency with which the work 
of the trawlers was carried out. 

The operation of passing traffic safely would have been greatly facilitated 
if I had stopped all traffic in the early hours of the morning until such time 
as the routes had been swept. Our losses might have been slightly reduced, 
and therefore the results we obtained might have appeared even more 
remarkable ; but I had to be guided by a more comprehensive view of the 
traffic problem. Had traffic been stopped for three hours each day, this 
would have meant the loss of approximately one day in every eight ; 


70 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


which, in a year, would have totalled forty-three days’ traffic; a very 
considerable loss. My aim was to secure the maximum volume of trans- 
port that could be passed with reasonable safety. So, except on special 
occasions, I avoided stopping traffic even after a mine-field had been 
discovered on the trade route. So well were my orders understood, and 
so faithfully were they carried out, that no loss ever occurred through 
this action. 

When, during 1915, the mine-laying submarine became active, and the 
whole of the traffic routes had to be swept daily by the trawlers, I took 
steps at once to fit as many trawlers as possible for mine-sweeping. The 
organisation of the Patrol for guarding the traffic line fitted in admirably 
with the sweeping for mines, since each pair of boats could sweep its own 
section of the route once in each direction ; after thus covering a double 
band of the route, they hauled in their sweeps and went on with their 
usual traffic duties. The maximum number of trawlers ever available at 
one time for duty in the Dover Patrol was sixty-six. This maximum 
was rarely reached, since, owing to collisions, and vessels which had been 
mined not being at once replaced and that some three or four were 
usually absent for long repairs, we were always short of our proper com- 
plement. In 1917 twelve trawlers were detailed to be fitted as mine-layers, 
and as this process took anything from five to thirteen weeks, our number 
of available trawlers was again considerably reduced. 

Whenever numbers permitted, twenty-four to twenty-six trawlers 
were stationed, one mile south of the traffic route, between the South 
Goodwin Light Vessel and the western limit of our patrol off Beachy 
Head. Each unit of six was under the command of an officer in a wireless 
trawler stationed at each of the rendezvous, South Goodwin Light Vessel, 
Folkestone Gate, and Royal Sovereign Light Vessel. Signals which were 

assed by wireless from Dover to these officers were communicated by 
Moree semaphore, or flags to the vessels attached. In addition to the 
above, two trawlers were stationed at Boulogne for sweeping the entrances 
at daylight each morning. ‘Two trawlers were stationed at Dunkirk for 
sweeping from the Dyck Light Vessel and the secret man-of-war route. 

These vessels remained on their station for four consecutive days and 
nights. ‘Twenty-six of the trawlers were for four days nominally resting, 
coaling, provisioning, and changing boiler water. 

By the end of March 1916, all the trawlers with sufficiently strong 
winches had been converted into sweepers ; and, after this, all the routes 
in force and an alternative route from Folkestone to Boulogne, or from 
Dover to Calais, and the secret man-of-war route from Dunkirk to Dover, 
were swept daily, which work became a part of the daily routine of the 
trawlers on patrol. Any route which could not be completed by the vessels 
on patrol was swept by the trawlers supposed to be resting. 

The routes which were in force were kept as close to the shore as con- 
venient ; and, if possible, within the ten-fathom line. Similar sweeping 
sections and routes close inshore were adopted and used to the end of the 
War by, the’ French authorities. 


oO 


Was 
\tins 


Y 
A 


HN as 
V2 
EF 7X _ 


° r t . . oe. "iihem - » oe? ° -* - 
o. *, ° rs . b ‘ D . La - P ° 
ss == — op — =o — os — oe — oo ee ee ee SS Se — aes = ee a oe 


Digitized by Google 


i's yo ° ¢- 


——_ 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 71 


Commanding officers of the wireless trawlers at the rendezvous were 
supplied with the latest sailing directions for all vessels passing through 
the Dover area ; and it was their duty to see that no vessel passed into the 
Dover area without being supplied with the latest information regarding 
the route in force. 

When mines were discovered, either by sweeping or vessels striking 
them, a message was at once sent to Dover, where it was the duty of the 
Captain of the Trawler Patrol, as trafic manager of the Dover area, im- 
mediately to submit, for my approval, proposals for declaring a dangerous 
area and the necessary change in route. This reference to me was necessary 
since the adoption of the route depended on considerations which were 
unknown to the Captain of the Trawler Patrol, and was not always a 
simple matter. The radius that was usually adopted to cover a dangerous 
area was one and a half miles from the position where the first mine was 
found ; although, in many instances, so as to be on the safe side, this 
radius was increased to two miles, the one and a half was invariably found 
to have been really sufficient. The larger area was declared whenever 
the position of the mine was too far from the shore to have been accurately 
located, and its position could only have been approximately obtained. 
When an area was declared to be dangerous the route was changed, 
if possible, to the shore side of the danger, so as to prevent traffic straggling 
out into the Channel. 

Whenever a mine was found, it was the duty of the officer in charge of 
the units at once to drop a buoy to mark the position in which the mine 
had been swept up or seen. One trawler was immediately dispatched to 
steam along the route in force to the eastward, and one along the route 
in force to the westward, to warn approaching vessels of the danger. 
Similarly, if a mine was found on the cross-Channel route, the trawlers 
at once steamed in each direction along the route. 

As soon as the officer received from Dover the alteration of the route, 
he placed another trawler, if available, either to the north or south of the 
area, according to which side the traffic had been directed to go; this 
trawler acted as a mark-ship. 

When, in thick weather, the dangerous area was some way from the 
land, a trawler was always placed as “ mark” boat, using the “‘ wreck 
mark ” signals to guide the shipping. Ifthe height of the tide was suitable, 
the remaining trawlers on the patrol began to clear the dangerous area, 
until they were relieved by the paddle-mine-sweepers or extra trawlers 
sent from Dover to assist in the work. 

Owing to the strength of the tidal streams in the Dover area, and the 
fact that the buoyancy of the German mines was not great, it was safe for 
the trawlers to sweep over an enemy mine-field at all times except between 
two hours before to two hours after low water. It usually took from two 
to three days to clear a dangerous area completely, that is, a circle of one 
and a half miles radius. 

The first mines that were laid by the enemy were placed in groups of 
six, and later on in groups of twelve ; so that for several months we could 


72, THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


estimate that the area was clear when either six or twelve mines had been 
found. He seemed to have discovered the fact that we resumed a normal 
route after a definite number of mines had been found, for subsequently 
he laid his mines indiscriminately, sometimes five at one place, four at 
another, and three, two, and even single mines along the routes in force. 
This considerably increased our work, as a sweep of the dangerous areas 
had to be considerably prolonged, often searching for mines which had 
not been laid. When only a few mines had been found by ordinary sweep- 
ing, it was not considered safe to resume the normal route until that area 
had been chain-swept, that is, two lengths of chain cable, thirty fathoms 
in length, were towed between two trawlers, which passed over every inch 
of the ground. When this had been carefully done no other mines were 
ever found in that area. 

During the whole of the time that trawlers were employed on patrol 
not one of them ever, even in the strongest gales and heaviest weather, 
took shelter or left its post on patrol. 

The ordinary method adopted by the trawlers, when an escort of special 
vessels was ordered, was to pass the convoy from trawler to trawler along 
the patrol line. As each convoy passed the limit of the patrol the officer 
in charge reported by wireless to the Admiral the safe passage of the 
escorted vessel through the patrol; that is, at Beachy Head all convoys 
coming from the westward and entering the Dover area were reported 
on arrival, and all convoys leaving Beachy Head and going to the Ports- 
mouth area were similarly reported. 

Escort work was a continual source of trouble to us, since, if, when the 
trawlers arrived at Beachy Head, no Portsmouth escorts were available, 
the Dover trawlers had to proceed to Portsmouth, sometimes to Portland, 
and even on occasions as far as Devonport, before they could obtain a 
relief. When forced to take these long journeys, they did not arrive back 
at Dover until after the date on which they were due to pass a further 
four days on patrol, and so missed their period of nominal rest. 

When double escorts were ordered for Trinity House vessels, mine- 
laying ships, and ships repairing telegraph cables, which ships had fre- 
quently to be escorted in waters away from the traffic line, the work was 
done by the resting trawlers. These escorts sometimes lasted from one to 
three weeks, and not only increased the drain on our resources, but in- 
flicted great hardship on the trawlers’ crews, who thereby had lost their 
period of nominal rest. 

The maintenance of traffic argues the necessity of keeping the naviga- 
tional lights burning, otherwise accidents to vessels from strandings will 
inevitably take place. The efficiency of traffic control in an area depends 
on avoiding accidents of all kinds to shipping, whether by collision or 
stranding, as well as sinkings due to mines. 

Now the Germans used our navigational lights freely to fix the positions 
of their mine-fields. If we could have extinguished all our coast lights, 
mining would have been considerably reduced, but tonnage-hour-carrying 
considerations necessitated keeping up the night traffic. As it was im- 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 73 


possible to conduct this without lighthouse and lightships, we had to put 
up with the dangers that their use entailed. One slight compensation 
resulted. Since mine-fields were never laid except fairly close to our buoys, 
light-vessels, or lighthouses, we could fairly well confine “ close ” sweep- 
ing to those localities. 

As many navigational lights as possible, however, were extinguished, 
and the others reduced in brilliancy and screened so as to show in the 
direction of the line of traffic only ; but these two latter expedients were 
of small value. After the raid on the northern extremity of the Downs 
the question of a more rigid protection of that anchorage became urgent ; 
batteries of naval guns were installed, a monitor was permanently anchored 
there, and a reduction in the number of navigational lights was effected ; 
these and other remedies adopted stopped all raiding. 

The same thing occurred at Dunkirk through a rather different reason. 
Right up to the early months of 1917 we maintained our unimpeded night 
traffic, as Dunkirk was the main supply-port for both our Army in the 
north and also the northern part of the French Army. One of the greatest 
marvels of the Patrol was why the enemy did not raid that traffic route 
which was close to Ostend and flanked on one side by the open North Sea. 
There are only two explanations ; first, the barrage line of nets protected 
it in this direction, and certainly German destroyers were well advised 
to keep clear of them ; secondly, the enemy was afraid of his own mine- 
fields. The latter should not have been a serious consideration, since one 
good raid would have done more damage than a year of mining; 80 the 
net barrage must be accorded the credit, at all events until some other 
explanation is forthcoming. 

The winter of 1916-17 saw Dunkirk so unmercifully bombed (see 
Plate XIX), that the harbour authorities decided that it was inadvisable to 
pass ships at night through the lock into the basin; since if a vessel had 
been bombed while in the lock the entrance to the basin would have been 
blocked. If the ships were not passed through at night it was, obviously, 
of no use to pass them round the coast merely to leave them at anchor off 
Dunkirk. After consultation with Admiral Ronarc’h,' I held up all 
merchant traffic at Calais or Boulogne until they could fetch Dunkirk 
at a time when the locks would be open. This enabled us to put out the 
Dyck Light and the Walde Light between Calais and Gravelines. The 
latter light was probably more used by the Germans for laying mines 
than any other in the Channel. The Channel buoys up to Dunkirk were 
also extinguished. The result of the action was magical, nearly all mining 
in that area ceasing forthwith. But, except for the closing of the Dunkirk 
locks, stopping the traffic would not have been justifiable. 

I was never anxious when in command of Dover; to have allowed 
oneself to become worried would have been the beginning of insomnia 
and the end of one’s utility. But that strip of traffic went nearer to causing 

1 As will be explained later, the whole of the Allied Naval forces in the Dover 


area were under my orders, but, of course, I always discussed proposals fully with 
the French Admiral. 


74 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


me anxiety than any other part of the Straits. The Downs I could cope 
with to some extent, but there was no means of defending that twenty 
miles from Dunkirk to Calais, which absolutely invited attack. There 
were only two or three gallant little French torpedo-boats by way of pro- 
tection, and Ostend was only between thirty and forty miles off. I had 
no vessels to spare ; and, even if I had had any, the defence of a twenty- 
mile route, with an open flank to the North Sea, was so impossible that it 
could not have been efficiently carried out. 

There was considerable traffic of Inland Water Transport barges between 
Calais and Richborough, one of the bases of supply of the Army. These 
barges were a danger, since at night time they resembled submarines ; 
also, being almost invisible to our fast-steaming destroyers, their presence 
led to grave risks of collision. For these reasons their passage across 
had to be limited to daylight hours, which, however, caused but little 
reduction in supply to our armies. 

One other trouble was caused by the enemy’s attempts to attack our 
trade route at night with their submarines. This development resulted 
in my asking the Admiralty to order all ships sailing between Beachy Head 
and Folkestone Gate to extinguish their navigation lights. Obviously, a 
submarine had only to wait in the vicinity of our traffic line until she saw 
the steaming light of a steamer, then approach it until her bow lights were 
observed, and then bring off an attack. Considering what excellent night 
surface torpedo craft submarines are, I always looked on this as the most 
deadly form of attack. If, however, the ships navigated with lights 
extinguished, a submarine lying in wait stood a fair chance of being run 
over without sufficient warning being given her to get out of the way ; or, 
at all events, there would have been very little chance given her of bringing 
off a successful attack. Submarines hate to see a huge mass towering sud- 
denly close to them—it makes the spine of everyone on board creep. At 
all events, the result was successful, and this form of night attack was not 
persisted in. To make the system safe, and to prevent collisions, a double 
line of traffic had to be put in force, with the lines three miles apart, one 
east going and the other west going. Bow lights were kept ready for in- 
stant exposure in the case of emergency. Of course, there were frequent 
omissions to extinguish lights in spite of the excellent look-out and control 
exercised by the trawlers. Such sporadic omissions, however, were of 
no importance provided the bulk of the traffic conformed to the restrictions. 

I do not remember a single collision due to the inauguration of this 
system ; of course, many evils were prophesied, but these, however, proved 
to be merely the croakings of the timid. 

Some of the most vivid happenings with regard to traffic naturally flash 
back in writing these pages. There was the sad loss of the hospital ship 
Anglia by a mine—the only hospital ship damaged in this area either under 
the Red Cross or as a slate-coloured ambulance transport. Only a short 
time before she had brought back to England His Majesty the King, 
injured from his accident in France. Well I remember that day when, in 
considerable pain, he was carried on board. His medical attendants were 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 75 


anxious that he should not suffer from the bad weather. I had come over 
in a destroyer and noticed a rising north-easterly wind and sea ; and, while 
waiting at Boulogne, the weather got worse. At that time of the year 
it would have been quite possible to have been held up by bad weather 
for ten days or a fortnight; so, in spite of the ominous conditions, I 
determined to sail. It was a great relief next day to hear that His Majesty 
was none the worse. But, as a matter of fact, had we not left when we did, 
we would not have had even moderate weather conditions any day in the 
following fortnight ; so we were fortunate. Again, that day I remember 
telling the captain of the Anglta as we approached No. 8 net area buoy, to 
turn one mile short of it, as I hated buoys, often German mine-fields were 
laid near them. It was near the same buoy that the Anglia was mined a 
short time afterwards. 

On this latter occasion vessels soon arrived at the spot, but unfortunately 
the engines of the ship were left going ahead when the engineers were 
driven from the engine-room by the rising water, and the helm was left 
hard over. The result was that the Anglia continued to forge ahead, 
turning in a circle which made it most difficult for any of our vessels to 
get alongside. One torpedo-boat did extremely well ; she went alongside 
three times and saved a considerable number of the wounded, each time 
after a short spell being thrown off owing to the curved track of the Anglia. 
The nursing sisters behaved with great heroism, but many more of the 
cot cases could have been rescued had the engines been stopped. 

Much the same thing happened when the Maloja was mined off Dover. 
In this case the engines were put full speed astern and again not stopped. 
Had they been stopped not one soul on board need have got his feet wet. 
Numbers of our small craft were soon on the scene, and could have gone 
alongside ; but the stern-way of the ship rendered this impossible. A 
small merchant vessel was mined by the same mine-field, and one of our 
drifters subsequently was blown up, and sank actually on top of the Malaga. 

One vessel, the S. D. Lambert, Captain W. Lamb, was mined ; and, 
as usual, whenever time and opportunity offered, I saw the captain. 
I asked him if this was the first time he had been mined, and he replied, 
“ Bless you, no, sir; this is the third time.” ‘‘I suppose you will now 
have a bit of a rest,” said I. ‘‘ No, sir,”’ he replied, “ I’ve got three sons 
in the trenches. I’m going north to get another ship, as father has got 
to do his bit, too.” Can we wonder at winning the War with so great a 
spirit inspiring our merchant navy ? 

The control of the traffic brought me many bad moments, both day 
and night, when routes had to be suddenly altered, or patrols reinforced 
or changed according to the experienced interpretation of reports, as to 
whether a submarine or mine had been the cause of the accident. If a 
submarine was diagnosed, then the patrol in that area was doubled, the 
destroyers intermediate with that position moved up one place, and one 
of the resting destroyers was turned out to fill the easternmost billet. If 
mines were scented, a diversion of the traffic had to be considered. 
Captain Howard of the Trawler Patrol, as my traffic manager, did excellent 


76 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


work both by his efficient organisation and in training and instructing the 
crews of his vessels, which greatly simplified the adjustments and altera- 
tions of the traffic routes. 

The following is a synopsis of the merchant and patrol vessels sunk in 
the Dover area for the years 1915-1916, 1917: 


Last half 
Merchant vessels lost : 1915 1916 1917 
Mined ‘ : ; : 14 26 10 
Collision : : te) I 4 
Gun-fire ; ; : Oo I I 
Torpedoed . ; : ; te) I 5 
Accidents f°) fe) I 
Patrol vessels lost : 
Mined 8 6 9 
Collision ) 3 I 
Gun-fire ) 7 Oo 
Torpedoed . ; fe) O I 
Stranded or foundered Oo I 2 
Approximate number of mines des- 
troyed 132 313 755 
Approximate number of merchant 
ships passed . : : 20,000 36,000 32,000 
becnae total loss of merchant 
vessels ; 07 08 066 


Greatest number of dangerous areas that were being cleared at one time, 17. 


The above analysis is of interest as it brings out clearly the following 
points : 


(a) The increase in mining by the enemy. 

(5) The increased efficiency of our sweeping and control methods in 
1917; since 10 ships only were sunk that year for 755 mines swept up, 
whereas in 1916 26 ships were sunk for 313 mines swept up. 

(c) The increase of the number of vessels torpedoed in 1917. This, 
however, was checked by the double traffic line. 

(d) The small increase in loss through collisions in spite of navigating 
lights having been put out. 

(e) The loss of patrol vessels mined, compared with the merchant 
vessels mined in 1917, is good evidence of the fearless way the sweepers 
and other vessels carried out their duty. 


These figures show how we mastered, in large measure, the mining 
evil, although our routes ran perilously close to Ostend and Zeebrugge. 

The following few incidents which occurred in the trawler and mine- 
sweeping patrol give a glimpse of the dangers run by their gallant crews 
in Carrying out their arduous duties. 

One tale told of a Dover trawler is well worth repeating. It happened 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 77 


that one of the crew of a trawler contracted rheumatism, and the doctor, 
after seeing the patient, ordered him to hospital. Before going ashore, 
the doctor instructed the captain to signal to the depot to have an ambu- 
lance sent for the man at noon, so that he could meet his patient at the 
hospital on arrival. No man arrived at the hospital at the appointed 
time, and a rather irate medico visited the trawler to enquire the reason. 
The captain said: ‘‘ Well, we tried to send him ashore, but a sergeant of 
police and a constable hailed us and said that on no account was he to be 
eat or we should be fined a hundred pounds, so we just kept him on 
ard.’’ 

** But did you not signal as I told you to the depot and tell them it 
was only a case of rheumatism,” said the mystified doctor. 

“Yes, we did; but neither me nor the signalman knew how to spell 
rheumatism, so we called it smallpox.”’ 

When the Maloja was mined off Dover the trawlers on patrol and the 
duty units were sent at once to assist. They rescued a very large number 
of passengers. Lieutenant R. J. McClorry, R.N.R., in the H. E. Stroud, 
rendered particularly good service in saving life. When the Anglia, 
hospital ship, was unfortunately mined off No. 8 buoy, the trawlers again 
saved a large number of the passengers and crew; they also saved the 
crew of the Lusitania which was passing at the time, and which on 
coming to the assistance of the Anglia was also mined. 

The Falmouth III, when sweeping in the vicinity of the wreck of the 
Anglia, struck a mine and actually sank on the top of the wreck. The 
Falmouth III was struck just before the bridge, and the explosion prac- 
tically blew the ship in halves, and she sank at once. Lieutenant H. 
Beedle, who was conducting the sweeping operations from the upper 
bridge, went down with the vessel but came up to the surface again and 
was rescued. 

On this occasion two of the officers were learning their mine-sweeping 
duties under his instruction ; one, Sub-Lieutenant W. A. McIntosh, was 
unfortunately drowned, and Lieutenant W. E. Eglington suffered so 
severely from the shock that he was incapacitated from duty for the next 
few months. This officer, however, completely recovered and requested 
to go to sea mine-sweeping again, and became an expert mine-sweeping 
officer, clearing many mine-fields in the Dover area. 

The Dagon, Lieutenant E. E. Roberts, was the only trawler torpedoed 
in the Dover area during the War, a remarkable record of immunity. It 
was thought she had been mined ; but, as no other mines were found in 
the vicinity, it was concluded that this was not the case. A destroyer 
was passing between the trawler and the place where the torpedo would 
have been discharged by the enemy submarine, and it is supposed that 
the torpedo was aimed at the destroyer, missed her, and struck the Dagon. 
The explosion was more violent than the usual German mine explosion. 
The trawler sank almost immediately, and none of the officers and crew 
who were below were saved. 

On October 26th, 1916, a “‘ tip and run ”’ attack was made by German 


"8 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


destroyers on the patrol protecting the barrage from the South Goodwin 
Sands to the French coast. One of the trawlers, the H. E. Stroud, was 
struck by a shell fired from a destroyer when passing close to the vessel. 
It exploded on the brass boss in the wheel-house and killed the Command- 
ing Officer, Lieutenant McClorry, R.N.R., and the men at the wheel and on 
the look-out. ‘The Second-hand took charge of the vessel, and though the 
steering gear was destroyed, brought her safely into Dover harbour by 
means of relieving tackles. 

Lieutenant Coles, Commanding Officer of the City of Dundee, performed 
a seaman-like rescue of some of the crew of the Hull Trader, which 
foundered about three-quarters of a mile S.E. of Dover. This officer was 
also the means of saving the lives of several of his crew when his vessel 
was sunk in collision off Folkestone Gate. He was on the upper bridge 
when the collision occurred. The vessel was very nearly cut in two, and 
began to sink at once. Before he could get clear of the bridge he became 
entangled in the signal-halyards, and went down many feet with the 
vessel. Fortunately he was able to clear his legs, and when he came to 
the surface a raft was floating near to him. He climbed on to this and 
assisted others of the crew to do likewise. 

When the S.S. Shenandoah was mined near Folkestone Gate, on 
March 15th, 1916, Lieutenant Barnes, who was in command of the trawler 
Macfarlane, steamed towards her and ordered the master to endeavour to 
beach his vessel. The master complied and the vessel was going well, 
when some of the bulkheads gave way and she suddenly sank by the stern, 
leaving the portion from the bridge forward afloat. The Macfarlane 
picked up two boats after sending her own boats to the rescue. She then 
found a boat bottom up, with three men sitting on her and three more 
clinging to the wreckage close by. The men on the bottom of the boat 
reported that they could hear someone knocking inside, and the Macfarlane 
ordered the trawler Returno to go alongside this boat, hook a tackle on, 
and turn it over. On this manceuvre being carried out, the wireless 
telegraphy operator and the fireman, who had been some twenty minutes 
confined in the capsized boat, were rescued in an exhausted condition. 

On April 14th, 1916, the Electra II was in collision and seriously 
damaged. Water rose rapidly in the machinery space. Chief Engineer 
Stark, though standing up to his waist in water on the platform, success- 
fully kept his vessel afloat and enabled her to be taken into harbour. On 
arrival at the place of safety the decks were awash, the level of the water 
being within six inches of the fire bars, and was still gaining rapidly. 

One of the finest pieces of salvage work was performed by Lieutenant 
A. Lansley, D.S.C., R.N.R., in the trawler Etotle Polatre. This trawler 
was employed escorting a vessel engaged in repairing a telephone in the 
Sunk Light Vessel, when the S.S. Volsctan was mined in the vicinity. 
The crew of the Volscian were picked up by the Etoile Polatre. Lieu- 
tenant Lansley, observing that the Volscian, though down by the head, 
was not sinking very fast, decided, although the crew would not return to 
her, and though the vessel was in a dangerous area, that he would endeavour 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 79 


to take her in tow and salve her. He succeeded in towing her through 
the several dangerous areas until he arrived at the Rough Buoy at 
Harwich, when tugs from Harwich came to his assistance. He had 
brought the S.S. Volscian into shoal water, where she was practically 
salved before the arrival of the tugs. The miserable sum of seventy-five 
pounds was awarded to the officers and crew for this salvage. The value 
of the vessel certainly exceeded ten thousand pounds. 

The St Germatn was mined off Folkestone Gate; her bow struck a 
mine and the foremast was thrown over the side. Lieutenant A. Lansley 
was in command. The Strathgairn, Skipper Waters, D.S.C., R.N.R., 
which was in the vicinity, immediately came to the rescue. Lieutenant 
Lansley found the vessel was sinking and ordered Skipper Waters to 
make the line fast to the stern of the St Germain. On examining the injury 
to the bow, he found that a large stream of water was coming through a 
crack in the foremost bulkhead on the port side of the vessel. He and 
the four hands who had volunteered to salve her provided mats and rugs 
and stopped up this crack. He then proceeded on board the Strathgatrn 
and directed Skipper Waters how to steer and manage the vessel he was 
towing stern first; then returning to the St Germaz, he started the 
pumps; the fires had been put out by the influx of the salt water, but 
sufficient steam remained in the boilers to keep the pumps working. 
Soon after she had been mined the weather became very thick and heavy, 
and unfortunately the tugs which proceeded to her rescue passed on the 
Dungeness Bay without sighting her. Lieutenant Lansley, however, 
continued to keep the water from rising, and successfully beached his 
vessel at Folkestone. 

When the Othello II was mined she was struck amidships, broke in 
half, and sank almost immediately. The wheel-house was so badly 
shaken that neither the doors nor the windows could be opened. The 
Second-hand, the Skipper and helmsman, who were in the house with 
a boy, managed to push the latter out through the half-closed window ; 
they and the rest of the crew were drowned. The boy, who was a good 
swimmer, was the only one saved from this trawler. He was then 
appointed to the trawler Weigelin. Later on, when she was mined, he was 
the only one to be saved. 

After this incident I ordered that all the fixed doors of the wheel- 
houses should be removed and a light-framed canvas door should be sub- 
stituted which could be easily removed or pushed out by a kick of a foot. 
This, I am glad to say, was the means of subsequently saving many lives, 
as there were no further cases of men being drowned in the wheel-houses. 

Lieutenant R. S. Bainbridge, R.N.R., when on his way to relieve the 
trawler Highlander at Beachy Head on the evening of February 8th, 1917, 
heard a heavy explosion about 7.45 p.m., and observed the destroyer 
Ghurka in a sinking condition on his starboard bow. He immediately 
proceeded to her assistance. It was blowing hard at the time. When she 
arrived alongside the destroyer only the forward end of the vessel was 
showing above the water. He succeeded in picking up Commander Lewin 


80 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


and four of the crew. Three more who nearly reached the vessel were 
overcome by exposure and sank. The surface of the water was covered 
with thick black oil, and the survivors’ faces were so smeared with this 
oil that they were unrecognisable. Commander Lewin, who happened 
to be on board the Ghurka, was a strong swimmer and was not injured by 
the explosion. Though close to the trawler, he would not leave the 
water, or accept assistance, until the other four ratings were safely on 
board. For this courageous and gallant conduct he was awarded the 
Stanhope medal. 

In one of the numerous raids made by aeroplanes and Zeppelins during 
1915-17 on Dover, a bomb passed within an inch or two of the gunwale 
of the trawler Equinox, opposite the forecastle accommodation, and 
exploded on the surface of the water. The explosion was most violent, 
and wrecked the forecastle sleeping-place, where four ratings were in 
their bunks. Two ratings were killed and one was dangerously wounded, 
but afterwards recovered. The side of the vessel and the funnel were 
riddled with small holes. 

I now come to the last of the duties of the trawlers, namely, that of 
laying mines. Mine-laying trawlers were originally used in the Dover 
Patrol for the purpose of filling up the gaps between the sand banks on 
the Belgian coast so as to complete the lines which had been laid by the 
larger mine-laying vessels. The success of these operations was entirely 
due to the fact that the work was carried out in dark or misty weather, 
so that the enemy had not the least idea where the British mine-fields 
had been laid. At times, when laying was actually in progress, the weather 
suddenly cleared and the trawlers were spotted by the enemy, who 
immediately sent out bombing planes. In this way the trawlers were 
subjected to many bombardments. Twice the mine-laying trawler 
Ostrich II had narrow escapes. At one time no less than ten bombs were 
dropped round her mine-rail, the water splashing on to her deck. If 
one single bomb had struck a mine the vessel would have been blown into 
fragments. 

The first paddle-mine-sweepers arrived at Dover in July 1915. ‘The 
number was gradually increased to fifteen. They were under the able 
command and guidance of Commander Rigg, to whom they owe much. 

The ordinary duty of the paddle-mine-sweepers was to sweep the 
alternate routes, and to clear dangerous areas after they had been found. 
When monitors were ordered to bombard the Belgian coast they made an 
exploratory sweep ahead, and on many occasions while performing these 
duties they were under heavy fire. 

On October 6th, 1915, the P.M.S. Brighton Queen struck a mine near 
Nieuport while sweeping at night time. She sank very quickly, but 
fortunately only lost seven men. It was this accident that brought home 
to me the dangers of night sweeping, which was afterwards undertaken 
as little as possible. 

On March 18th the Montrose, while sweeping off the Gravelines buoy, 
struck an enemy mine and sank in fifty seconds. These ex-pleasure 


TRAWLERS AND TRAFFIC 81 


steamers seemed absolutely to fall to pieces when struck by a mine, so 
they had to be abandoned immediately this happened. 

On June 24th, while the Redcar was sweeping in the vicinity of the 
Gravelines buoy, with the Kempton and Gatwick three ships abreast, 
three German mines were swept up ; and, as the sweeping wire had parted, 
the Redcar proceeded to sink the mines. She had sunk two and was 
approaching the third, at which some drifters were firing, when she struck 
a mine just under the fore part of the bridge. The whole of the fore 
part of the ship from the bridge forward was cut right away by the 
explosion, and the 12-pounder gun crew, consisting of four hands who 
were in that part of the ship, were killed immediately. Lieutenant Daniells, 
R.N.R., her captain, gave orders for the crew to stand by the boats, and 
went with the Chief Engineer to the forward boiler-room to examine the 
bulkhead. He found that the bottom of the bulkhead had been carried 
away, and that water was coming in, so that it was evident that the ship 
would not keep afloat. The Kempton and Gatwick, which were some 
distance away from the Redcar, had observed the explosion and immedi- 
ately slipped their sweep and proceeded to her assistance. The Redcar 
by this time was very much down by the head, and the order was given 
to abandon ship, the Captain remaining on board with the Chief Engineer, 
to make fast the tow-line in case one of the other vessels attempted to 
tow. The crew got safely away in the lifeboats, and had just got aboard 
the Kempton when she also was blown up. One of the Redcar’s boats, 
which had not been made fast to the Kempton when the men had left it, 
drifted some twenty-five yards away from that ship. Two of the Redcar’s 
men, Second Engineer-Lieutenant Woods and First Class P.O. Wardroom 
Steward P. Hoban, seeing that there was not enough room in the remaining 
boats for all the hands of the Kempton, jumped into the water and swam 
to the boat, bringing it alongside the Kempton, where it was speedily filled 
with men. Many lives were saved through this action. The offcer in 
charge of the drifters which were firing at the mines proceeded alongside 
the Kempton with his drifter, and was on board of her when she blew up. 
He was also on board the Redcar when she sank. He had many exciting 
experiences during this day, while with his drifter he saved many lives. 
The survivors from the Redcar and Kempton were safely picked up by 
the Gatwick and the drifters and returned to Dunkirk, where they were 
accommodated on board the monitors. 

The mine-sweepers at Dunkirk had a very trying time during the air- 
raids (see Plate XIX), but were, on the whole, fortunate, for, although the 
raids were very frequent, only one of the P.M.S., the Albyn, was hit. 
She was lying alongside the quay wall at Dunkirk when an aeroplane 
dropped a bomb on her, killing the Commanding Officer and the Third 
Engineer, and wounding two or three of the rest of the crew. Though 
severely damaged, the ship did not sink, and the fire caused by the 
explosion was soon put out by the other mine-sweepers lying beside her. 
An idea may be gained of the extent of the enemy bombing at Dunkirk 
from the fact that on one occasion, when the mine-sweepers were at 


PF 


82. THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Dunkirk for sixty days, fifty air raids occurred ; on each occasion bombs 
were dropped in large numbers. 

The paddle-mine-sweepers were only once attacked by submarines, 
two torpedoes being fired at them in the night time while sweeping ahead 
of the bombarding flotilla. These passed safely underneath the vessels. 

Such is a very incomplete account of the work the paddle-mine- 
sweepers of the Dover Patrol daily carried out in the face of many 
dangers, and, as what I have written shows, performed regardless of the 
perils attending it. 

The number of officers and crews of merchant vessels saved by the 
mine-sweeping patrol was 904, and those who lost their lives totalled 151. 
From the trawlers and paddle-mine-sweepers which were mined or 
otherwise attacked by the enemy, 43 officers and 702 men were saved, 
while 295 officers and men lost their lives. The complement of the mine- 
sweeping patrol varied from 800 to 1300 officers and ratings. In the three 
years the number of officers and men implicated in accidents was equal to the 
size of the patrol at any one period. 

The total number of casualties to vessels in the mine-sweeping patrol 
through mining, bombing, and collisions was thirty-eight, eight of these 
being subsequently salved. The conduct of the officers and ratings of 
the trawler patrol during the whole of my time in command was very 
good and compared well with the conduct of officers and ratings of the 
Royal Navy. 

During the whole of my time at Dover the officers and fishermen of 
the trawler patrol and of the paddle-mine-sweepers showed great fortitude 
and a fine spirit, zeal, and devotion to duty, and implicit obedience to 
orders. No call was made on them without obtaining their most willing 
and ready response, and it is with pride that I recall the memory of having 
had such a splendid body of officers and men under my command. 


THE TRAWLERS 


Do you mind in 1914 when we started for the War 

And cleared our holds of fish and ice and chucked our trawls ashore ? 
We knew we wasn’t trained to fight, 

But being seamen, blow me tight ! 

Could navigate by day or night, 

Of that you may be sure. 


Of course we were not men-of-war, we hadn’t got a gun, 
It seemed to us most likely that supposing that the Hun 
Came up against our blooming boat 

There wouldn’t much be left afloat 

To tell the wife at home about 

When once the show’d begun. 


It seemed a bit one-sided ; yes, you ask me why we went ? 
Well, I’m blowed if I can tell you, we was volunteers, not sent ; 
But when they asked if we would go, 

We couldn’t very well say “‘ No.” 

For we was sailors, as you know, 

And that’s the argument. 


But something tells a Britisher who knocks about at sea 
That there he’ll beat a furriner, whoever he may be. 
Their ships may be of bigger size, 

And better, too, but d—n my eyes, 

Whatever out at sea he tries, 

We're better men than he. 


We slipped our ropes and steered due south for Dover Strait, mind you, 
To learn to fight and sweep up mines and do as we should do. 

We didn’t argue or discuss 

What Germany might do to us, 

For whether safe or dangerous, 

We’d see Old England through. 


83 


CHAPTER V 
CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 


The objection to night passages—Danger of attack by destroyers at day and at 
night—Danger of submarine attack—Convoy of transports—Value of the 
Belgian Coast Patrol—Increased transport in 1916—Measures taken—The 
effect of current on mines—Mine-sweeping—Time-table of sailings—Escort 
orders—Mine-fields discovered—Numbers transported across the Channel— 
Futile complaints answered—Transports forbidden to lie alongside at Folke- 
stone on dark nights—Good work of Naval Transport Officers and Captains of 
Transports, 


HE protection of the cross-Channel transport was naturally a 

matter of considerable importance. The success with which this 

was carried out was not due to accident, nor, on the other hand, 
entirely to want of enterprise on the part of the enemy, but to the nature 
of the protection and its extent, which was varied according to the 
strategical conditions which existed on the Belgian coast and in the 
Channel. As time went on, and the immunity of the vessels continued, 
their protection and the continuance of our unbroken record became an 
obsession—almost an article of religion. 

In the early days the transports were run entirely at night ; the advan- 
tage that was claimed for so doing was that the vessels were invisible 
in the darkness, and therefore less likely to be attacked by submarines. 
This arrangement I altered, for several reasons, the chief of which was that, 
on any but a really dark night, submarine boats were the most efficient 
of all surface torpedo-craft, being much more invisible to the patrol vessels 
than the latter were to them. I always feared that the Germans would 
use their submarines on the surface at night rather than submerged in the 
day-time. It would have been very difficult to protect our traffic against 
such an attack. 

A second reason was that the waters to the eastward of the cross-Channel 
route could not be so efficiently viewed and searched at night as in the day- 
time ; therefore the approach of enemy destroyers and submarines could 
not be so readily detected. A third reason was that, if vessels were tor- 
pedoed at night, saving life would be more difficult in the dark than in the 
day-time, and the casualties correspondingly higher. 

The general disposition of the Patrol in 1915 was that drifters, supported 
by the destroyers, occupied the net area (see chart of patrol areas), the 
large rhomboidal area, of about four hundred square miles, lying approxi- 
mately between the South Goodwin and the Ruytingen shoal, Gris-Nez 
and Folkestone ; these vessels guarded the main breadth of the Channel 

84 


CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 85 


to the eastward both by day and by night. All destroyers which were 
not boiler cleaning, had steam up and were ready to slip at a minute’s 
notice. One of the light cruisers (we had only two) also had steam ready. 
The advisability of keeping the destroyers at ‘“‘ the ready’ has been 
criticised as being too severe on the boats, steam at an hour’s notice being 
advocated instead. But at Dover we were up against a real and no fancy 
problem; we were every minute at war, and could not afford any such 
luxurious rest. Every submarine sighted had to be hunted, and hunted 
quickly. Moreover, the enemy’s destroyers could have raided the cross- 
Channel transports before boats with steam at one hour’s notice could have 
intervened. 

The alteration from night to day sailing was amply justified by results. 
In the raid by the German destroyers on the Patrol on October 26th, 1916, 
the enemy were completely sold; one empty transport only being met 
with. This again might have happened during the raid on the night of 
March 23rd, 1917 (see page 124). Had the old system been in vogue, 
three or even six transports might have been damaged or sunk on both of 
the above two occasions. 

As time progressed it was evident that drift-nets were out of date. 
The enemy submarines knew all about them and their function, and always 
steered clear of them. The drift-net divisions were, therefore, removed 
and used to look after the permanent barrages. This left the net area 
practically void of observing boats. 

The destroyers which had been used to protect and support the drifters 
and to patrol the offing were, therefore, in day-time, employed to escort 
the transports. ‘These were, on more than one occasion, of value in dealing 
with submarines, which otherwise would have attacked the convoy. 

The guiding principle in arranging an escort is so to dispose the boats 
that they are in a position to jump on the back of any submarine before 
it can attack the convoy. Then the submarine, being in imminent peril, is 
embarrassed, and is obliged to surrender the best position for attack. 
It is bound to expose its periscope before it can attack and so gives away 
its position to the escorting destroyer. Even should it run the risk of 
trying to take up another position after such exposure it will be too late 
to carry out an effective offensive. 

The escort, therefore, is a protection by being a deterrent. Because 
an actual attack on a transport by a submarine was not made during any 
particular crossing, is no argument that there would not have been one 
had the transport not been escorted. The fact that enemy aeroplanes were 
bound to see that the ships were invariably being escorted must have made 
submarines chary of attempting this method of attack. 

In hazy weather, after the net area had been abandoned, the danger 
of destroyer raids became greater. The predominant feature of the situa- 
tion was that Ostend was only sixty miles from the centre of the Boulogne- 
Folkestone traffic line. In clear weather enemy destroyers would probably 
have been observed in sufficient time to be met, and their penetration 
of the Narrows prevented. In thick or misty weather this was not so. 


86 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The Channel was twenty miles wide, so with a visibility of only five 
miles, which was a common condition in the Straits, any portion which 
was more than five miles from each shore would have been secure from 
observation from the land, a strip ten miles wide in the centre of the 
Channel was therefore open to the raiders—for it was rarely that any 
destroyers were available to patrol the centre of the Channel. Let us 
assume that the Germans did raid, and that they were not observed when 
crossing a line Calais-South Goodwin, they had only fourteen miles to 
steam to the centre of the transport route. This, at thirty knots’ speed, 
meant twenty-eight minutes steaming. They could, therefore, have steered 
for the transport route and struck it anywhere five miles from either coast, 
and steamed along it until observed by the transports and their escort. 

Five miles’ steaming would occupy only ten minutes, so that by the time 
the transports had appreciated that the vessels were German destroyers 
they would have been well within range, and the raid would have become 
deadly. The escorting destroyers had orders to turn the transports back 
to their harbours should such an attack occur. But the danger to the 
transports would have been considerable—for our escorting destroyers were 
old and feebly armed. Nor could assistance from Dover have arrived in 
time to prevent disaster, nor had we boats in numbers and of a calibre 
fit to fight a couple of divisions of German destroyers. 

It was here that the Belgian coast patrol was of such value. In all but 
the winter months it formed an efficient observing force off the German 
harbours ; this, and the display of force made on April 28th, 1916 (see 
page 141), gave the Germans a totally wrong impression of the force avail- 
able at Dover. Hence our immunity from attack. 

It will be seen that the possibilities of such a raid were considerable 
when studied from the enemy’s point of view. He had a good chance of 
breaking through and sinking some of the transports ; and, on the way back, 
might well have dodged our cruiser and reserve boats; or, at the worst 
(German worst), have fought an action with a cruiser and some con- 
siderably inferior and more lightly armed destroyers. 

In addition to the possibility of destroyer raids by the enemy, our des- 
troyers in harbour had to be ready to hunt a submarine whenever one was 
reported. A good deal of nonsense has been talked about the Germans not 
attacking vessels in the Dover area because they wished us to think that 
submarines were not passing through. A glance at the record of the 
German mining of the Channel (facing page 70) will show that we knew 
only too well that their submarines did pass through. Vessels were not 
attacked in the Dover area because every submarine that showed a peris- 
cope was hunted, hunted, hunted for hours by every available destroyer. 
It is out of all reason to imagine that submarines would not have attacked 
our cross-Channel troop traffic if they had been given a chance of so doing. 

In 1915 transport sailings were only necessary once a day to cope with 
the traffic; but early in 1916 the number of men in France increased 
rapidly and G.H.Q. asked for increased sailings to be arranged if possible. 
It was highly desirable that every man should have leave once a year if 


CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 89 


this could be managed. Life at the Front, with its discomforts and 
dangers, was apt to become rather a hopeless business if the end of the 
War was the only relief to which to look forward ; whereas yearly leave 
was a pleasant prospect. I refused to entertain the idea of night sailings, 
but we managed to squeeze in two daylight sailings on all except a very 
few winter days when the tides were unsuitable. ‘This entailed the aban- 
doning of high-water sailings, which were far the safest protection against 
mines, and sailing at half-tide instead. Mine-sweeping became of greater 
importance and the risks to the transports were greater; but the objects 
to be attained were worth the greater risks. 

After submarines commenced mine-laying. The laying of mine-fields 
on the transport routes necessitated constant vigilance on the part of the 
Patrol. The conditions were most difficult. Two trips each way of six 
ships sailing with absolute regularity, each ship carrying nine hundred 
men, meant a transport of about one million nine hundred thousand per 
year. This barely allowed for each man getting leave once a year. Each 
cancelled sailing meant a loss of leave to nearly three thousand men. 
Every endeavour and every legitimate risk was therefore taken in order 
to maintain the daily sailings. It was very rarely that a sailing was missed. 
In 1917 only fifteen out of seven hundred and thirty were cancelled. 

Decision as to which hours were safe for traffic, and for mine-sweeping, 
was complicated by the fact that high and low water did not correspond 
with the slack-water of the tidal streams; moreover, the difference in 
time between these two functions of the tides varied in different portions 
of the patrol. The diagram overleaf gives the proximate conditions at 
Folkestone Gate. Curve A gives merely the ordinary rise and fall of the 
tide for each hour. Curve B gives the strength of the stream at the same 
hours. Now the depth of the mine below the surface varies with both 
these influences. As the tide rises the mine of course becomes covered 
more and more by water; and the tidal stream, as it begins to run, 
presses against the mine and forces it deeper under the water. Some- 
times these influences work together ; sometimes in opposition. As the 
tide rises, and the stream runs stronger, the mine from both causes recedes 
further and further from the surface. But, if the stream slackens, the 
mine rises, owing to the slower rate of the tide ; hence under these con- 
ditions the rise of the tide and the slackening of the tidal stream work in 
opposition. Curve C gives the rise and fall of the mine due to the pressure 
of the stream; and Curve D gives the net result of the two influences 
on the mine. It will be seen that at one hour after high water at spring 
tides, a mine moored with a length of mooring rope exactly equal to the 
depth of water at low water would be thirty-five feet from the surface ; 
and that one hour and a half before low water it would be only four feet 
below the surface. At low water it would be fourteen feet, at two hours 
after low water it would be ten feet below the surface. The most dan- 
gerous time was that when slack water occurred just before low water ; 
from one hour after low water onward no mine would be less than ten 
feet from the surface. 


THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


88 


VY M*AUND WOs BWC 
— 31b9 ANOLSSX104 Lv SAAXND Wall— @ Bund wos a1v35 


‘Gg Quy DF CBAWND wos DIWIE 


PTART TT IAIN TAT, 
Me | PAT Aa | IN A 


cee 


IND LAS 


. TABDZ Me CBUNSYZM MW3ELS £0 NOILZY ONY 201] 40 Tiv4 ONS BSI 01 BNO*Z9VIUNG |H1 MOTTO W1d3Q IHL 
"301, MO] 1¥ WILHAQ TWIG NI MSUMy USAF 39 O01 Sv OS CYT’ NNO HVS INIW v JO Hid3Q “(G BAWND 
201, 20 MOTZ 40 NOILIY 94 390 H1d9(] DWIAV] MOTZG ANIW 20 41439 “3D ZAMAD 
’ S¥NOH WOV2 Av SION) ME MONTY 2O Jvy G BABND 
MNOW MIVS VOs ABBY HH BOI, 20 Tey ONY JBSiy YY ZABND 


of'L jorl | ofS | Sir _uoony uooNy | OF II | ool | oL | ozs ax°ex | Sx°e2z O'II | oz'6 0°6 $1 
ol of | Sr°ex | o'r! obo! | 0'6 | o'L | ozs Stor of°6. | oS | of FI 
| ure ‘u'B 
o£ oS | St11 | ofo1 O1‘Or | ofg | ofg | oSF Sror | S1°o1 oz'l o£ €1 
of°6 ofZ | ofS | Sib Sse | S1°z | of°6 | o$-Z ob oy Sor | Sher} zr 
06 oL | St | off ore | ofr! | 06 | oz Srr€ | Srv°€ | Oz'7I |"uUOONT| II 
of'9 She | fe orz | of-z1 StL | Sorg Srz | Sxz ozir| or} o7 
of'L S1°e | oz ob I |uoON | ofZ | ofS ofl Si-zz| S€-o1r | Sror| 6 
ol Si‘z | orl | oz'y crz1 | Spr of'11 | oS°6 | o£°6 g 
"9 Str | of'zI of‘ol | ofS | oS'f | Si'zi | S1°z1 o'r! | oz'6 L 
ofS of°6 | ofr | oS'z ofz1 | Sir | S1°11 O'o! | oz'9 9 
of'+ | of'F | oS'z of-z1 | Sxr°rz | Sxr°rr O’o! | oz'g s 
o'r oF | Oz'z "uoON | Shor | Stor of°6 | oSZ 4 
of'6 of'g | oS'g oo"! | Serr | Sx ofo1 | oS'g | £ 
‘ure 
o°6 SI°zI | O11] o'1r| oF'O1! 06 og | O79 og | of'cr | Srerz | Srerr O'OI | O2z'g z 
‘urd ‘ule | 
06 o£ | Srzr1| orr] or] obor] 06 og | Oz'9 og | Ofer | Sr*rzr| Sr°rzr| oor! oor | oz'g I 
‘IDAOG] ee ‘SIETeS *I9A0(]"I9A0G enon pet pares ea ‘DAOC |JOAOC] “STEED |*stETeD eer ae bee ‘I9A0G 
eee PALTV] DAI] skill were eran DALLIY | DABO’T | SALITY| dAvo7T Tee eLesre aoe a tone QABIT | VALLIY | 9Ava'T tH 
‘suiodsueiy, | , ‘sjiod | ‘syrodsuviy, | “sjodsuery, |*sjiod| , , -syodsues L | ‘sod 
door], pue beste! -suvly,| doory, pue | doory pue /-suery bargin” ‘te a dooly, pues |-suvzy) . o38 
eouLvynquiy ius be § souR] | soUR[NquIY | soULINquIy as ba armel sourinquiy | s0uR] d 
-nquiy -nquy 


“SRL ABAMAS HSILIUG NI ABV GEBALL ITY “ZIAUZG LEOMENVUT ZONVINENY SIVIVD-SAAOCG GMV AABBG LUOCENVU]L JOON] ANV ZONVINERY ENOOTAOCG—-ANOLEANIOT 


4161 ‘ANN{ HLS: OL 181 WOUd SANILL ONIIIVS 


Digitized by Google 


go THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The essential considerations in fixing the time of sailing were to have 
sufficient water in Boulogne harbour to allow the transports to pass in 
or out; and, so far as mines were concerned, to have the safest water as 
regards height and strength of tide; to have the route swept before the 
transports sailed, if that were possible ; and to avoid having the transports 
at sea for more than three-quarters of an hour after dark. 

A trouble which, at one time, tended to limit the transport of troops 
and threatened to be a serious embarrassment, was the silting up of 
Boulogne and Folkestone with mud. 'The transport service was so inces- 
sant that the natural hours of dredging were greatly interfered with, 
causing the water near the jetties to become considerably shallower. At 
the hours when the transports were due to arrive the dredgers had to stop 
work and be removed from the fairway. In order to mitigate this inter- 
ference with the dredging we timed the transport sailings so that, when- 
ever possible, the outgoing vessels at Boulogne were immediately suc- 
ceeded by the incoming transports from Folkestone. In addition, the 
French harbour authorities were asked to continue dredging operations 
throughout the nights. 

Keeping these limitations in view, it was no simple matter to arrange 
a time-table for the sailings, especially on short winter days. Mine- 
sweeping could not be efficiently carried out in the dark, so that very early 
morning sailings were not advisable. Additional trouble arose when the 
hospital ships became targets for submarine activity, since they also had 
to be escorted. Not only did the increased number of ships add to the 
length of the lines of convoy, but escorts on the Dover—Calais route also 
had to be instituted. The double escort work on both routes entailed 
severe work on our destroyers, which were sorely limited in numbers. A 
sample of a sailing time-table is given on the previous page. It will be 
seen that two sailings each way took place between Folkestone and Boulogne, 
and one direct sailing for ambulance transport between Dover and Calais 
and vice versa; and a second trip of the ambulance transports was 
arranged for when required. The work of the escorts was as follows: 
Taking June 1st as an example, No. 1 escort would leave Dover at 8 a.m. 
with the ambulance transports, escort them to Folkestone, pick up the 
troop transport at 8.20, escort them to Boulogne, and then leave for Calais, 
arriving at 11.15, in time to bring the Calais ambulance transport to Dover. 
At 6 p.m. they would leave again for Folkestone and Boulogne, arriving 
at 8 p.m., and then return to Dover for the night or for patrol work, 
should this be necessary. 

No. 2 escort would have left, so as to be at Boulogne by 9 a.m.; it 
then escorted the troop and ambulance transports to Folkestone and Dover, 
arriving at II a.m. in time to escort the ambulance transport to Calais, 
arriving at 12.15. The escorts would then have anchored off Boulogne, 
or done odd jobs until they left Boulogne at 7 p.m., arriving Dover 9 p.m. 

It was the duty of the senior destroyer to whip up the transports and 
see that they formed in two columns, so as to expose as short a line as 
possible to attack, and also to arrange that the slowest transports led the 


CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC g! 


lines. Otherwise the lines were certain to get ragged. Secret signals 
ordered all transports to proceed down Channel at maximum speed in 
the event of a raid, or to return to their ports if reasonably close to 
them. 

As before mentioned, mines were an ever present trouble. It is true 
that the route was swept as early as possible in the morning; but, often 
in winter, there was not time to complete the sweep before the transports 
were due to sail. In such a case the district Naval Transport Officer 
always asked permission to sail. Whether I granted it before the sweep 
was reported as finished depended on several things; the suitability of the 
weather the night before for the laying of enemy mines ; the state of the 
tide; and the sweeping conditions at the entrance of the harbour. But 
never if it could be avoided was a sailing lost. 

Refer to the chart of the mine-fields and look at the circles off 
Folkestoi.e, off Boulogne, and on the route between the two places. Each 
circle represents an area in which mines were reported, yet in spite of their 
number no transport in the Dover area was ever mined. Had this chart 
been supplied to the troops on going on board the transports the men 
would probably have taken especial care to put on their lifebelts. 

It was always an anxious time for me if I sailed transports before the 
sweep was reported ; but, in order to keep up the sailings, this had some- 
times to be done. The mine-sweepers had orders if they found mines 
to buoy the vicinity and then spread each way along the transport route, 
and to warn the oncoming transports ; but there was always a good chance 
of the transports being close up to the sweeping. I will quote one instance 
from my diary. 


** Jan. 17th, 1917. Mines reported two miles S.E.4E. of No. 9 buoy. 
As transports and the Crusader with gold (5,000,000) were sailing I put 
them two miles clear of this spot. This meant the following telephoning, 
first, Folkestone to stop transports sailing ; secondly, Calais to stop trans- 
ports (but two had sailed); stop Crusader; thirdly, D.N.T.O. Dover to 
stop Unity sailing with General Geddes (but she had sailed); fourthly, 
Captain D., 6th Flotilla, to tell Unity and Calais escort to keep two miles 
clear of position of mines; fifthly, Folkestone to warn Captain of Trans- 
ports and then to sail; sixthly, Calais to warn Captain of Transports and 
then to sail; and seventhly, to Captain of Trawler Patrol to clear the 
mine-field.” 


In this particular case Calais only and not Boulogne was implicated, 
otherwise Boulogne would also have been dealt with. The time available 
was generally short, and it was a matter of some relief to hear from the 
signal station that the various escorts had received the signals ; and, still 
further, that the transports had arrived safely in harbour. 

Six of our destroyers were mined during this period, largely owing to 
the fact that it was necessary for them to start for their escort and other 
duties before the routes had been swept. These losses, compared with 

1 The hospital ship Anglia was mined. 


g2 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


the practical immunity of the transports and ambulance transports, show 
the value to the latter of the system of control that was in force. 

The safe conduct of these troop transports required constant vigilance. 
That ships were never actually sunk has generally been taken as evidence 
that they were not attacked. There were two raids at night on the 
line by enemy destroyers. There were one or two reports of cases of 
torpedoes actually fired at the transports, but it was always difficult to 
verify such reports. But there were many cases of submarines sighted 
in the vicinity of the route. Each class of weather required a readjustment 
of patrols; unceasing hunting of submarines drove off that pest and made 
the locality too unhealthy for them to work in; and lastly, the abolition 
of night sailings frustrated the night-destroyer attacks. No less than 
forty-eight mine-fields were laid by the Germans which affected the 
Boulogne—Folkestone transports, and an additional thirty-two were 
dangerous to the Calais ships. 

So that about eighty mine-fields were reported, discovered, and avoided 
without a single accident. It was no child’s play, and much care on the 
part of all concerned led to the proud record of the Dover Patrol having 
passed, up to the end of December 1917, and within three hours’ steaming 
of Ostend, 5,614,500 troops along the Boulogne—Folkestone route without 
the loss of a single man. Nine and a half million mail bags were also sent 
over without a letter or parcel being lost at sea. During 1917, which is the 
only year for which an accurate record is available, only fifteen sailings 
were missed from all causes, gales, fogs, and mines. This, bear in mind, 
out of about 760 sailings. The number of transport sailings from Folke- 
stone in 1917 was about 3000.!_ In addition, during the three years, the 
arrivals and departures of store carriers, troop transports, and ambulance 
transports at Dover numbered over 14,800. Of sick and wounded 810,000 
were disembarked. An additional 198,000 troops were embarked and 
disembarked at Dover. The only casualty was the mining of the Anglia 
while sailing under the Red Cross. 

Now look at the matter from the German point of view. A daylight 
raid in fine weather was possible, but would have had to be carried out 
in force. Their destroyers would certainly have had a scrap with our 
destroyers, which they should have overwhelmed ; then, as likely as not, 
they would have dropped up against Commodore T. and his cruisers on 
the way back. This was not the game they liked, and, moreover, was not 
a sound one unless they were prepared to send a sufficient light cruiser 
force south to tackle the Harwich vessels. A destroyer raid in the usual 
Channel weather, say five miles’ visibility, with a dozen destroyers was a 
good and sound attack to attempt. Night raids were tried by the Germans, 
but were disappointing to them, as we had sufficient common sense not 
to run troops at night. As regards submarine attack, always a danger in 
daylight, a strong escort to the transports was never omitted ; lastly, 
mining was defeated by the efficiency of our mine-sweepers. 

Three out of five of the possible methods of attack were tried by the 

1 That is, 700 sailings of about four ships each. 


CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 93 


enemy, and in all three he was defeated. I think, therefore, that the 
Dover Patrol may claim that the immunity of the transports was due to 
foresight and forestalling and hard work, and not merely to want of activity 
on the part of the enemy. | 

Nothing can excuse the Germans for not sweeping up the whole of 
the Dover Patrol; but, had they done so, they would have caught no 
transports. 

Whenever His Majesty the King crossed, which he did on several 
occasions, special precautions and escort arrangements were adopted. 

Whenever important personages travelled by a transport, and not in a 
destroyer, a boat’s crew of R.N. seamen under a lieutenant was detailed to 
travel in the transport, so that a trained boat’s crew and an officer of 
experience were available in case of accidents. Needless to say the 
Commander-in-Chief in France, the Chief of the Staff at G.H.Q. and 
in England, as well as members of the War Cabinet, were always looked 
after in this way. 

Well, really, we thought we were doing rather well ! But in December 
1916 I received from the Admiralty for my remarks a letter containing 
certain complaints, that the War Office had received, about the transport 
of troops. I quote my reply as it indicates the general situation and how 
the security in which the troops were being transported had caused the 
daily dangers of the passage to be forgotten by those who were neither 
at sea nor cognisant of all the difficulties. We were daily, almost hourly 
scheming, working, frustrating, and averting real live dangers when this 
letter arrived, full of the most futile complaints. This was my reply : 


‘“‘ The correspondence enclosed in your letter of December 21st, 1916, 
fills me with amazement. It appears almost incredible that the difficulties 
and dangers attendant on the increased cross-Channel transport should 
be so little appreciated as to render it possible that complaints and sug- 
gestions such as those forwarded by the officer in question could have been 
formulated. It is, therefore, not inappropriate that I should explain, 
for the information of the military authorities, why the transport 
service between Folkestone and Boulogne cannot be run with the same 
regularity as a peace service, such as that which plies between Southsea 
and Ryde. 

‘‘ The dangers to the transports on the Folkestone- Boulogne route are 
very real and considerable, and are of three distinct classes : (a) destroyers 
attacking ; (b) mines; (c) torpedoes from submarines. Each of these 
necessitates separate safeguards. The large destroyer and submarine 
base at Ostend is nearer this route than this route is to Brighton. 

** As regards (a), I allow no night running, nor that any transports should 
be at sea, with troops on board, beyond forty minutes after dark. I have 
sufficient reasons which are too technical to enter into, for fixing this time 
limit. This in winter reduces the time available for the transport of troops 
considerably, but it cannot be avoided. 

‘* As regards (5), the danger from mines is great, and the risk accepted 


94 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


in arranging the increased transport is considerable. ‘To mitigate this risk 
I have ordered : 

‘J. No sailings during low water slack. 

“II. No sailings except near high water over unswept routes. 

**'To modify these orders would be criminal. 

“‘ As regards (c), escorts are provided. At least two destroyers are 
necessary for each ship sailing separately. Each three-ship convoy, 
however, can do with three destroyers as escort, but in order to keep them 
together under this protection, the slowest transport is ordered to lead ; 
otherwise they would string out and their safety would be impaired. 

“The danger of allowing transports to be alongside the open pier at 
Folkestone at night time is considerable, both from submarine attack on 
the surface, and also a destroyer raid on a dark night. Hence, except in 
weather when an attack was improbable, I ordered the transports either 
to Dover or the Downs for protection. 

‘The value of these shallow draught, high speed vessels is so great, 
that they must not be risked.4 On all days, except those on which high- 
water occurs in the morning, the sweep of the route from Dover to Folke- 
stone has to be completed before the transports can safely pass to the latter 

rt.? 

“‘ Some further remarks may be of interest. To sweep in the dark is 
inefficient and dangerous. Daylight therefore limits the time sweeping 
can be commenced. Our officers and men sweep during eighteen of the 
hours which are considered to be dangerous to the sweeping-vessels, in 
order that their comrades in the Army may get a reasonable amount of 
leave. This is a matter which, if known, would be thoroughly appreciated 
by the military authorities. In order to obtain the necessary hours for 
sailing, I do not wait for the sweep to be reported finished before starting 
the transports, but have arranged for the sweepers, should they find mines, 
to warn the sailings in both directions. This runs matters fine ; and, except 
for the urgency of keeping up the sailings, I would not allow this practice, 
which is not without its attendant risks. In fact, the margin of safety for 
the transport of these troops, taking the dangers and the tides into account, 
is cut as finely as possible. The arrangements are of considerable com- 
plexity, so much so, that J deal personally with every question, since the 
chance of a disaster through a mistake is too great to be risked, and, if a 
mistake is made, I prefer the mistake to be mine. If I could dry the 
English Channel, and show to the complainants the mines, submarines, 
and ae of vessels sunk during the War, further remarks on the dangers 
would A 

* With regard to the special remarks of the officer in question, I regret 
that the troops have to be exposed to the weather on occasions ; but it 1s a 
preferable alternative to losing a transport. 

“The afternoon sailings on December 6th were held up because 
Boulogne was closed by mines. 


1 I believe no other suitable vessels were in existence. 


® This delayed the arrival of the transports at Folkestone to embark troope. 


CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 95 


“IT also regret that, on occasions, a short time only is available for the 
transports to coal and embark troops on account of their having to sail 
with the slowest ship leading. The alternative is to supply six additional 
destroyers ; but, as already seven are devoted solely to this transport work, 
I do not anticipate that Their Lordships will be disposed to increase this to 
thirteen, in order to avoid the slight inconvenience mentioned. 

“On December gth, Boulogne was declared closed on account of mines. 
The ordinary procedure would be for all sailings to be stopped. To 
avoid this, and to act up fully to the spirit of the undertaking I have given 
to pass as many troops as possible, | put on our sweepers, who swept 
through the dangerous hours, which was hardly justifiable had it not been 
that I did not place much credence in the report. It was not till 2 p.m. 
that I received a message that our sweep had been concluded, which 
information I passed personally to the D.N.T.O.’s at Folkestone and 
Boulogne. If the officer who forwarded the report had five minutes’ 
inconvenience, I had many more in personal exertion to get the sailings 
off with a guarantee of moderate security. 

*“‘T now turn to this officer’s suggestions. 

*“‘T, I decline to risk a transport unnecessarily by keeping her in an 
exposed position when no material benefit is derived by so doing. 

“‘ TI. Even if work is thrown on the embarkation and rest camp officers, 
I consider this preferable to sending the transports over unswept routes, 
at wrong states of the tide, at particularly dangerous hours. 

“III. I regret that troops should be exposed to the weather, but I am 
not responsible for the times of high and low water, or the physical laws 
which affect dangers attendant on mines. 

“I cannot end without expressing the hope that the Army Council 
may have their attention called to the daily arduous work, real danger, and 
increased responsibilities that the additional sailings have entailed on the 
officers and men engaged on this work in the Dover Patrol, and that they 
may also be requested to inform the officer in question that the regulations 
I lay down and enforce are not mere arbitrary whims, but are necessary 
to safeguard the thousands of lives that daily cross in the transports.” 

Once again only were complaints made. I need only quote the last 
sentence of my reply. 


“I submit the Army Council be moved to enquire why the information 
on which the letter was based, was so in opposition to fact, in order to 
prevent complaints of this nature being forwarded in the future without 
reasonable justification.” 


One point requires remarks, namely, the danger of keeping transports 
alongside Folkestone Pier at night. 

The Folkestone—Boulogne ships were unique as regards tonnage, shallow 
draught, and speed. _ I believe I am correct in saying that no vessels existed 
to replace these had they been lost. They were, therefore, invaluable as a 
class. Deeper draught vessels could not have lain at the jetties which had 
to be used by them. To obtain these good points bunker capacity had been 


96 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


cut down to the minimum, so that all the transports had to coal every time 
they completed a trip to France and back. 

The vessels on the English side, up to the time that destroyer raids began, 
used to lie alongside Folkestone Pier for the night. After the raid of Octo- 
ber 1916, the question of the safety of this procedure had to be recon- 
sidered. If the enemy destroyers raided at night and fired torpedoes 
blindly into Folkestone Pier, they were bound to hit one or more trans- 
ports and sink them. As they would be struck on the outside, they would 
fill that side first and list over away from the pier. This would prevent 
other vessels lying outside them ; and, taking into account the shoal lying 
eastward to Folkestone Pier, they would probably block the passage to an 
inside berth. 

For safety it was therefore necessary to remove the transports from the 
pier on a dark night when a raid was possible. But where to send them ? 
In fine weather one could lie the west side of the pier; one only could lie 
alongside at Dover. Dover harbour was already overcrowded, and the 
masters of the vessels, who were highly experienced in making the harbour, 
disliked entering it at night, except in fine weather. Trawlers had to be 
cleared out of their anchorage to make room for them ; and, in bad weather 
from the south-west, instead of entering the harbour they would have to 
run for the Downs, which anchorage was already crowded, and incur 
dangers of collision. Moreover, the vessels on leaving the Downs would 
have to coal at Folkestone before leaving in the morning ; and this meant 
crowding the sailings in winter weather. 

Now, what were the chances of a raid ? It was quite impossible to say ; 
but a raid after the experience of October 26th was possible, indeed, almost 
probable. Would the destroyers persist in getting so near inshore ? There 
was no reason against this, as Folkestone Gate lights were available for 
fixing their position. The inconvenience to the captains, crews, D.N.T.O.’s, 
trawlers, and to the transport service generally was considerable; but 
should a raid come off, the consequences were, in my opinion, so serious, 
that they outweighed the inconveniences. Jt was by forestalling accidents 
and not allowing them to occur that all our success at Dover was obtained. 
No raid ever did, in fact, come off. The inconveniences and secondary 
risks of collision, etc., were borne by the officers and men apparently for 
no useful reason, but the chance was existent, and what decided my action 
was not the question of what these chances were, that would be merely a 
matter of over or under-anxiousness on my part, but what the consequences 
would be if such a raid did succeed. All this may seem like making a moun- 
tain out of a mole-hill ; but, to a student of the art of commanding in war 
time, particularly at sea, problems of balancing extra work on those under 
his command against precautions of a similar nature of those I have 
described, should always be of real interest. 

I cannot leave this subject without referring to the excellent work per- 
formed by the Senior Naval Officers and Divisional Naval Transport 
Officers. Of the office part of their transport work I know nothing, for 
these duties they were under the Principal Naval Transport Officer in 


CROSS-CHANNEL TRAFFIC 97 


France ; but, as Senior Naval Officer at the ports where no other senior 
officer existed, I was their immediate Chief. This was only definitely 
confirmed by the Admiralty towards the end of the year 1916, after 
Boulogne had been blocked owing to a damaged merchant vessel grounding 
on entering ; but previous to this the same relations had, in fact, existed. 
These officers were of the greatest value as a medium of communication 
with the local French officials, and assisted me in dealing with all Naval 
questions. 

A Senior Naval Officer was appointed to Folkestone in addition to the 
D.N.T.O. Captain Pennant Lloyd held the post for some time, and then 
unfortunately was invalided, and I regret to say died shortly afterwards. 
He was succeeded by Rear-Admiral Bentinck J. D. Yelverton. Both these 
officers were of great assistance to me in dealing with the many questions 
which came under their jurisdiction. At Dunkirk, Commander H. W. 
Gush, and afterwards Commander J. Man; at Calais and on the English 
side Captain George F. G. Woodhall, whose tragic death we all deplored ; 
and then Captain James T. Blake, full of energy and vitality ; and at Dover 
Captain George E. B. Bairnsfather, who, throughout the above years, had 
charge of the Admiralty Pier, and managed most capably the hospital ship 
transport arrangements ; all these left their mark on the cross-Channel 
transport service, and in contributing to its efficiency aided in larger measure 
than was generally appreciated at the time, the eventual victory of the forces 
of the Allies. 

In this short, all too short, record of the movement across-Channel 
of the British troops, we must not forget the services of the masters, and 
crews of the transports, who, through all weathers and dangers, navigated 
their vessels with the punctuality of peace time. 

The work of these seamen furnishes a good example of the quiet, 
unostentatious service in a war zone of ordinary British sailors, not educated 
to war, but of the type of those who have been the real backbone of our 
“‘ carrying on ”’ in war time. The personnel of our merchant navy and 
transport service has greatly added to the reputation that our country has 
earned in centuries of warfare, of gripping, holding on, and emerging 
victorious, from the critical wars which have been fought to maintain our 
existence as a nation. 


1 See Appendix III. 


THE GRAVEYARD 


(The waters of the Channel and off the entrance of the Downs form one of the 
graveyards of the world’s shipping.) 


Could the Channel streams be parted 
As once the Red Sea clave, 

And, hurled to east and west apart, 
Be held in pent-up wave, 

How sad a sight our eyes would meet 
Of the forgotten hidden fleet 

Long lost in that vast grave. 


The coracles of ancient time, 

And Roman galleys rot ; 

Naught, but a patch of oozy slime, 
Remains to mark the spot. 

The ships long sunk by Francis Drake, 
Hubert, De Ruyter, Monk, and Blake, 
Then mourned, but now forgot. 


Of many a gallant trader, 

Homing from distant East, 

When a gale or fog betrayed her, 

And sank her to her peace, 

The masts once taunt and yards once square, 
Stand barnacled, of canvas bare, 
Tombstones of her decease. 


Our loss throughout the present war, 
Sadly the tale assists, 

By adding more than twice three score 
To those heroic lists 

Which that dread graveyard took as toll, 
Of merchant ships and the Patrol, 

And their antagonists. 


When in peace time ye of England, 

On pleasure bent once more, 

Cross that strip of Channel water 
Which spreads from shore to shore, 

In thought, at least, salute anew 

Those tombed below who died for you, 
And England in the War. 


98 


CHAPTER VI 
BOMBARDMENTS 


Tripods for registering fall of shot—Bombardment of Zeebrugge—Failure of 
monitor mountings—Bombardment of Ostend—Near thing for the monitors— 
Simulating landing, 1915 and 1916—Methods of aeroplane spotting—Smoke- 
screens—Weather difficulties—Bombardment of Zeebrugge locks—Bombard- 
ment of Ostend Dockyard—Destruction of Ostend dockyards—Ostend given 
up as a sea base by the Germans—Erebus damaged by a shore-controlled boat— 
Preparations to bombard Bruges. 


F on the evening of August 22nd, 1915, you had been on board the 
| monitor Lord Clive, you would have found, collected near her in the 

Downs, a queer assemblage of vessels. Besides the Lord Clive 
there were two other monitors, the Prince Rupert and the Sir John Moore, 
nine destroyers, the yacht Sanda, eighty drifters, and two small merchant 
vessels carrying each a queer erection not unlike a modern wireless girder- 
built mast. This collection of vessels was about to leave to fire at the 
Zeebrugge locks and canal ; the first operation of any magnitude that had 
been undertaken by the Dover Patrol. They had put to sea the night 
before, but had had to turn back on account of bad weather. Wiseacres 
would have told you that it was madness to take eighty drifters, manned 
only by fishermen unaccustomed to cruising together, to steam in company 
with the monitors off an enemy’s submarine and destroyer base; and, as 
for the tripods, they were a lunatic contrivance the Admiral had invented 
to register the fall of shot. A less biased person might have explained 
that the drifters were wooden vessels, that it did not therefore matter if a 
little bumping did take place; also that all attempts to instal efficient 
wireless telephony in the seaplanes had so far failed, and that the only 
means that existed, at the moment, of estimating, with any degree of 
accuracy, where the shells were falling during a bombardment, was by 
observing the bursts from two stations at some distance from each other ; 
then the intersection of these two lines of direction, when plotted, would 
give the position of the bursts. 

These two tripods were being carried over sea, to be dumped down, 
widely apart, on two shoals off Zeebrugge. The platform on the top of 
each tripod was only six feet nine inches by five feet four inches. It 
held two observing officers, two signalmen, with acetylene signal lamps, 
and two observation instruments for measuring horizontal angles. It 
was a small but densely populated island, from which the angular direction 
of each burst was to be signalled to the three monitors. 


99 


roo THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL [rors 


The position of the mine-field off Zeebrugge which had blown up the 
Maori was not accurately known, and the number and calibre of the 
batteries on the coast near that port was largely a matter of speculation ; 
but the enemy was credited, by our intelligence department, with two 
11-inch, one 12-inch, and a large number of 8-inch and 7-inch guns. 

So the vessels started for the unknown. They arrived off Zeebrugge 
at daybreak, and then a most complicated reel was danced by the drifters 
as they wove a zareba of nets round the monitors to protect them from 
submarine attack. Marvellously well they did this manceuvre under the 
guidance of Captain Frederick Bird. 

As the firing commenced the signals from the tripods came in. Then 
after a short time the 12-inch gun mountings of the monitors gave out 
one by one. These were old and obsolete, which had been hurriedly 
taken out of ships condemned for service; their copper pipes were 
crystalline, and in need of renewal or re-annealing, and it was not until 
some months after this first bombardment that they were made thoroughly 
reliable. At last only those on board of the Lord Clive were left efficient ; 
so the nets were taken in and the flotilla left for Dover. No great amount 
of damage had been done, but it was a first attempt, and the whole scheme 
worked according to schedule, and gave confidence to everyone, especially 
the drifter crews. 

Pending information regarding what actual damage had been done, 
preparations were made to bombard the dockyard at Ostend. This dock- 
yard was in the centre of the harbour, with dwelling-houses for the civil 
population, within 300 yards on each side. (See diagram, page 210.) I was 
most anxious to avoid hitting these houses as they were inhabited by 
Belgians who had already suffered much in the War; moreover, wanton, 
or apparently wanton damage would tend to affect our relations with them, 
and might have produced a rapprochement between them and the enemy. 

The defences at Ostend, again, were not accurately known. We, 
however, knew that the Hindenburg battery, just to the east of the harbour, 
mounted four 11-inch guns, with an estimated range of 16,000 yards. 
Several 6-inch batteries were supposed to be in existence, but their exact 
location was unknown. The arrangements were very similar to those for 
bombarding Zeebrugge; the drifters again accompanying the ships and 
shooting nets. I determined, in this instance also, to keep the ships at first 
under weigh, not being satisfied as to the nature of the defence. It was 
very fortunate that I did so, otherwise one or more would have been sunk. 

On September sth a start was made; but, again, as in the case of the 
Zeebrugge attack, we had to turn back owing to the sea. The course was 
via Dunkirk and the Zuidcoote Pass to the east of the Smal Bank, and 
not by the northern route which I had previously used, as the enemy 
might be expected to be watching that approach. On the evening of the 
6th another start was made, and early on the 7th we arrived within sight 
of Ostend. It was a fine morning, but a low-lying mist had spread itself 
all along the coast, and by the time that we arrived at the firing-spot only 
the spire of the cathedral was visible, and shortly afterwards this too dis- 


En Oe, Ph Bre ae Hpi ¥f 
464 2, ange este EH gf 


TRIPOD LAID FOR SERVICE 


‘Tripods were small portable islands which we carried and dropped off at the places which 
we intended to bombard so as to observe and correct the accuracy of our gun-fire. 


oats 


— 


This shows hoi the a were transported to the enemy's coast. 


PLaTeE III 


‘= 
'* 
es 
- 
i- 
‘- 
‘- 
je 
te. 
‘- 
‘- 
‘= 


ie DOR 


OBSERVATION scmoone nee ee “he, 
o* 7» 
oo 


StAY10N 


e “Tone i 
Pave ” aaaeck 
. - 2 ; 

° -9-WEST-«SC 
-= =) ~ 


Bee 


CHART SHOWING THE 
STATIONS FOR THE BOMBARDMENT OF ZEEBRUGG#, AUGUST 1915 


DISPOSITION OF THE SHIPS AND OBSERVATION 


Plate IV 


Digitized by Google 


EE 
— eee ee oe 


“A ae Se SS 


1915] BOMBARDMENTS 101 


appeared. There was nothing to do but to anchor and wait. An hour 
and a half passed, and still the mist-bank obscured everything ; so, as the 
tide was rising and making fast, the “‘ Re-form”’ signal was made, the 
nets hauled, and we stood away, proceeding down between Cliffe Island 
and the Outer Ratel Bank ; there we anchored and watched the Redoubtable 


firing at the Westende batteries. On the way down we were attacked by 


aircraft, which unfortunately dropped one bomb on the Aitenttve, causing 
eight casualties. In spite of the large number of times our vessels were 
subjected to bombing, this was the only occasion when damage was caused 
by an aeroplane bomb to a ship under weigh. Early in the afternoon 
the mist lifted and the shore became clearly visible. I weighed, therefore, 
and again proceeded off Ostend. The nets were shot and the firing 
commenced. 

The ships, in order from the eastward, were the Lord Chve (flag), the 
General Craufurd, and the Prince Rupert. 'The weather was now extra- 
ordinarily clear, every house in Ostend standing out with wonderful 
sharpness. One enemy kite-balloon was up to the eastward of the town. 
A few minutes after firing commenced heavy shell began dropping near 
the General Craufurd ; salvoes continued at intervals of exactly two 
minutes. It was at once apparent that one of the heavy batteries had a 
longer range than we expected. As I had gone in to within 18,000 yards 
of the shore, I signalled to the monitors to alter course to the northward 
and stand out. I proposed going to 19,500 yards, which was the maximum 
I could use, hoping that it was merely that the guns of the Hindenburg 
battery had been given increased elevation. Very soon after the signal 
had been made to the ships the shore battery turned on to the Lord Chive ; 
evidently having seen her make the signal and thereby discovered that 
she was the Flagship. The shell, fired singly, followed us up; and, after 
we again turned and commenced our fire, the shore battery changed once 
more to salvo firing. Then followed a warm quarter of an hour. One 
salvo was a particularly hot one, one shell striking the starboard 3-pounder 
gun and grazing the bulge, another fell close alongside the forward bulge, 
and, exploding in the water, caused it to leak. Fortunately the shell that 
struck the 3-pounder did not hit its fuse, but the blow broke the shell up 
without bursting it. The gun was thrown on to the quarter-deck and 
several men were wounded. One shot of the same salvo brought the 
signal halliard block down from the mast-head, a portion of which struck 
Commander Carter,? the halliards coiling themselves round the neck of 
my Chief-of-Staff, Captain Bowring. Standing with a watch it was 
possible to foretell the exact time that each salvo would arrive, the three 
or four shells making an unearthly shriek as they passed close by overhead 
or close to the side of the ship. It was quite evident that the battery was 
shooting far too well for the monitors to stand a chance of surviving if we 


1 Of course, had we been Germans the town of Ostend could have been 
reduced practically to pulp without a single shore-gun being able to reply. 

4 This injury led to his being invalided from the Navy, and the services of a 
fine officer being lost to the country. 


102 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL [rors 


remained ; for, at the steep angle at which the shells were falling, a single 
one striking the ship’s deck would have gone nearly vertically down, 
exploding as it went through, or just before it went through the bottom, 
which was only twelve feet below the water-line. I therefore made the 
“ Re-form ’’ and gave up the attack. Then commenced the weird experi- 
ence of steaming away under fire and not being able to return a shot as 
the monitors had no after guns. The shore firing suddenly stopped at 
about 22,000 yards. Now the extraordinary thing was that subsequent 
experience showed us that this battery, the Tirpitz battery, could range 
up to 32,000 yards, and yet it let us steam steadily away without firing 
another shot, when for nearly another hour they could have kept us under 
a steady fire. We could only steam at about seven knots, and had 10,000 
yards to go before we were outside their range. 

It was not until after the War that we found out that a premature 
burst of one of the German shells near the muzzle of a gun had caused 
the officer in command to fear that the full charges gave too great a chamber 
pressure for the shell to stand. He therefore left off using full charges 
and fired only three-quarter charges. Thus we got off without being 
sunk ; a very lucky escape. 

In September 1915 Sir John French, the Commander-in-Chief of the 
British Expeditionary Force, was about to launch an attack further south 
and asked for our co-operation by trying to hold the enemy on the coast, 
by threats of invasion, so as to reduce to minimum the number of troops 
that the Germans could send as reinforcements to the point he was about 
to attack. Now, there is no operation more difficult to carry out success- 
fully than to feign a landing that is not going to take place. The reason 
' for this is simple: namely, that a real landing should be a swift, sure, 
secret stroke. The whole art in its preparation is to avoid the slightest 
indication that anything is about to take place. The only thing that 
appeared to me as reasonable was to bombard Zeebrugge and also the 
Middelkerke—Westende sector simultaneously, and to keep up the bom- 
bardment for several days in succession, while at the same time spreading 
rumours that a landing was in course of preparation, in the hope that 
these would leak through to the enemy’s lines. Since it was desired to 
give the impression that the firing was a precursor to a landing, the shore 
batteries and their observation posts were chosen for attack, and not such 
objectives as the lock-gates at Zeebrugge and the dockyard at Ostend. 
On a subsequent occasion a more ambitious programme was carried out. 
(See page 104.) 

On the evening of September 24th the force available was split up into 
two squadrons, the Prince Eugene and General Craufurd with five destroyers, 
two paddle-mine-sweepers, one division of net drifters, and the yacht 
Sanda, all under the command of Captain E. Wigram of the Prince Eugene 
left to bombard the forts at Zeebrugge, which, from our previous bombard- 
ment, we knew all about; and, on the morning of September 2sth, I 
took the remainder of the 12-inch monitors and the Marshal Ney to West 
Deep and opened fire on the shore defences at Middelkerke and Westende, 


1915-1916] BOMBARDMENTS 103 


about which we had no previous experience. Against these we fired a 
hundred and two rounds of 12-inch and seventeen rounds of 15-inch. 

The Zeebrugge squadron commenced operations at 7 a.m., and at 
9 a.m. the batteries replied with heavy guns. At 9.15 the yacht Sanda, 
which was rather close in to the shore, was struck, probably by an 8-inch 
shell, and sunk. All her executive officers were killed, including Lieutenant- 
Commander Gartside-Tipping, the oldest Naval officer serving at sea. 
This gallant officer returned to the Navy on the outbreak of war at an age 
when most men are beyond active service, being over seventy years of 
age, and undertook the duties of captain of a yacht in the Dover Command 
in spite of the arduous work and exposure which the performance of his 
duties entailed. The drifter Fearless was active in saving the survivors. 
At 10.20 the nets were boarded; and, whilst this was in progress, the 
drifter Hyacinth, Skipper Lawrence Scarlett, was heavily shelled. The 
crew, however, stuck to their work and saved their nets, for which steadi- 
ness under fire, the Skipper received the D.S.C., and the mate, J. Prior, 
the D.S.M. 

Other bombardments took place on September 26th and 27th, during 
November, and on December 2nd and 27th. 

What proved for us very instructive firing was carried out on January 
26th with five monitors, each firing one round at one hundred second 
intervals, that is, one round from the five monitors every twenty seconds, 
against a group of strong positions near Westende. Rear-Admiral de 
Marliave, commanding the French Naval Forces, flew his flag in the Lord 
Clive. Probably the only occasion on which a French admiral has flown his 
flag on an English man-of-war in action. Aeroplane spotting was used, 
and also spotting from the fixed observing-stations in the Nieuport lines. 
These results were carefully analysed and proved very instructive, as 
considerable discrepancies were found to exist between the two methods 
of observation. Owing to the comparative nearness of the fixed stations 
to the fall of shot, their wide distance apart, and the experience of the 
observers, there was little doubt that the aeroplane spotting was at fault. 
To test this I chose three places all well known to the air observers, and 
plans of each to three different scales were made to correspond approxi- 
mately to their visual appearance at different heights of observation. The 
observers were then in turn examined by being told to record their estima- 
tion of the distance from a selected point of certain pencil marks. 
The results amply confirmed their inability to judge distances with any 
degree of accuracy. This led to a complete revision of our aeroplane 
spotting methods. Starting from the fact that our targets were few, 
there was no great difficulty in the observers learning their targets 
absolutely by heart, on the following principle : 

Suppose that a gun is being fired from a distance at Trafalgar Square, 
and assume that Nelson’s Monument is the centre of the target. Call 

1 This was the first occasion when a fleet of five ships fired systematically 


with all rounds or nearly all rounds being spotted and fire corrected. The 
Organisation was one resulting from many weary hours of trials and labour. 


104 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL [1916 


this the port of reference. Suppose an imaginary line to pass from the 
gun through the monument. Call this the Ane of reference. Then the 
observer had to learn by heart in actual yards what was the distance to 
the right or left of the line of reference, and the distance short or over from 
the point of reference, of all the salient features, such as the Admiralty Arch, 
St. Martin’s Church, centre of the National Gallery, etc. By so doing no 
estimation was required, the distances were definitely learned, so that shell- 
pitching on or near these points could be signalled at once with absolute 
accuracy. 

At the same time a method by which the observer in the aeroplane 
was relieved from all time-taking was suggested by the officers of the 
Riviera. Moreover, when firing a complete record was kept of the altera- 
tions in adjustment for range and direction of each shot fired. These, 
together with the spotting records, as signalled by the aeroplanes, were 
sent to my office, where they were analysed and the results sent to the 
ships concerned. This universal practice was of great value, as it called 
the attention of the director officers to the evil of guessing corrections 
instead of applying them by definite rule, it also exposed errors in laying. 
The general rule we laid down was to allow the full correction, as reported 
by the observer, if the “ spot " was more than three hundred yards in 
range, or fifty yards in direction ; and half of the correction if inside these 
distances. I never omitted to analyse all shootings personally, when 
possible. The labour involved in these analyses and investigations was 
considerable, but it was the cause of the extremely good results which 
were ultimately obtained. 

After this bombardment firing was suspended for the remainder of the 
winter. I felt it was useless to attempt anything from the sea until the 
arrival of the Erebus and Terror, which mounted 15-inch guns. The 
guns of the new 12-inch battery installed at Knocke were proved at the 
end of March: Tirpitz guarded Ostend. The 12-inch guns for dealing 
with the latter were ordered, and their shore mountings designed. We 
were, for the moment, outranged at sea by at least fifty per cent by the 
German batteries, so that smoke screens and longer range guns alone gave 
us a reasonable chance of inflicting material damage in the future. 

On April 24th the mine-net barrage was stretched along the Belgian 
coast (see chart of patrol), and from this time onwards the 12-inch monitors 
took up daily patrol along this line, and fired at the German destroyers as 
occasion offered. : 

The next firing operations that took place were in response to a request 
from Sir Douglas Haig to do all that we could to keep the enemy’s troops 
on the coast during the early days of his advance on the Somme. Profiting 
by previous experience, we were able to carry out a more ambitious pro- 
gramme than that of the previous year. A hundred trawlers were collected 
and, with monitors and destroyers, were anchored between Dunkirk and 
La Panne in full sight of the enemy, and kept there for four days and 
nights, an act of utter madness if we had been fighting any other sailors 
but the Germans. Experience, however, was fast teaching me their 


1916] BOMBARDMENTS 105 


utter ineptitude as sea fighters. At the same time rumours of a landing 
were spread far and wide, so as to deceive the enemy. Troops and field- 
guns were openly embarked on board monitors at Dunkirk, in full view of 
the enemy aeroplanes. The Admiralty stopped all sailings to Holland, 
every day bombardments were carried out, the firing being concentrated 
on two areas between Middelkerke and Westende. So successful were 
these devices that the German Consul at Rotterdam reported to his 
Government that a landing on the coast was imminent. 

On September 8th the Marshal Soult, the Lord Clive, and the General 
Wolfe fired at the westernmost area. On the gth the Prince Rupert and the 
Prince Eugene took on the firing. On the 11th the Marshal Soult, the 
Prince Rupert, and the Lord Clive fired. On the 12th the Erebus and Terror, 
the Sir Fohn Moore, and the General Craufurd continued the bombard- 
ment. On the 13th the Erebus, the Marshal Soult, the Sir Fohn Moore, 
the Prince Rupert, and the General Wolfe fired and the Terror, flying my 
flag, went to Zeebrugge. But the weather turned bad, a stiff breeze sprang 
up, and both of the aeroplanes from Dunkirk had engine trouble and had 
to return; so that as no spotting was possible, no firing could be done. 
On the 14th the weather was too bad to fire. On the rsth the Lord Clive 
fired in the morning and the Terror in the afternoon. Having now tried, 
for seven days, to keep up the deception, and the British attack having 
been launched this day down south, our attempts came to an end. It was 
a satisfactory conclusion to these to receive the following letter from Sir 
Douglas Haig : 


“I take this opportunity to express my most cordial thanks for the 
assistance you have so freely given to me in the joint operation which 
has been carried out with a view to deceiving the enemy. Although 
at the present time it is not possible to estimate the full effect of the 
action which you have taken,—and the results may never be completely 
known—we know that some troops were moved up to Bruges and Ghent 
on September 14th and 15th. There can be no doubt that uncertainty 
and apprehension must have been caused in the minds of the German 
Higher Command at a time when rapid decision was important. 

“* I am, however, convinced that the success of the attack carried by the 
armies under my command on September 15th derived considerable 
assistance from your co-operation.” 


We now entered on a period in which we reaped the full benefit of 
our previous labours in developing scientific firing and spotting. Never 
was hard work more justified. The only pity was that the bombardments 
fell to the lot of the 15-inch monitors to the exclusion of the 12-inch 
monitors, which had borne the burden and heat of all the former work ; 
this, however, could not be helped. The extra range, heavier weight of 
shell, and greater accuracy of the 15-inch guns, were preponderating 
considerations. 

I determined first to attack the Zeebrugge locks as being the most 
difficult target. In fact, the visible target—had it been visible—would 


106 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL [1917 


have been about the size of one inch of cigarette lying on the ground 
thirty yards away. Each gate was one tenth the area of the deck of a 
monitor. On the result of this bombardment rested the decision as to 
whether any further firing at these gates justified the consequent wear to 
the guns. Assuming absolute accuracy of aim, then, theoretically, 
only one round in sixty-seven would hit a gate. Practically, therefore, a 
much larger number of rounds would be required from a ship at sea. 
Again, unless both gates were hit, passage of submarines and destroyers 
could take place for at least two hours about high water. 

I was warned by the Admiralty that they had no more 15-inch guns 
to give me to replace those in the monitors ; so, with the spring advance 
on the coast about to commence, with our landing on the coast in view, 
and taking into account the support that that landing would require from 
the monitors, I had to exercise economy in my firings. The difficulties 
of bringing off a bombardment were very much increased by our having 
to use a smoke-screen, as this necessitated the wind being onshore, whereas 
conditions for observation and the state of the sea were more favourable, 
as a rule, with offshore winds. Surprise was a necessity ; since, if given 
any warning, the enemy would at once start a smoke-screen. Unless we 
could get in the ranging shots before the enemy’s smoke-screen started, 
spotting was impossible. Firing at daylight was, therefore, advisable, so 
that darkness would hide our approach ; also, the northern route between 
the mine-fields was chosen as being less likely to be observed than an 
advance up the old patrol-line from the direction of Dunkirk. — 

For the Zeebrugge firing I was determined to take the Marshal Soult 
to make a third 15-inch gun ship. Her speed was only five knots, so she 
had to be towed. This reduced the speed of the whole fleet to ten knots, 
which allowed just sufficient time for us to make the passage from dusk to 
dawn. To provide an aiming-light, I towed a 12-inch monitor as well. 

In this manner did our armada sail : the Terror (flag), towing the Soult : 
the Erebus, towing a 12-inch monitor, destroyers, and motor launches, 
and paddle-mine-sweepers being in company. The little drifters were 
no longer required, owing to the proved lack of enterprise on the part 
of the enemy’s submarines. 

Five times we started and crossed the North Sea and four times we 
had to turn back on account of the low clouds which prevented spotting. 
On each occasion at 1.30 a.m., I had to decide whether to go on or turn 
back, since it was necessary to disperse at a sufficient distance from our 
firing position so that the enemy’s daylight reconnaisance could not spot us. 
A harder duty never falls on an admiral than to give up an operation. 
Everyone is disappointed. Few appreciate the necessity for the decision, 
which is usually interpreted by the younger element as being indecision ; 
but these things had to be done in spite of some of the Press howling to 
know what the Admiral at Dover was doing, and why he was not bombard- 
ing Zeebrugge, thereby gratuitously calling the attention of the enemy to 
the very spot that it was my earnest desire to have lulled into a sense of 
security. I had to go to Sir Edward Carson, then First Lord of the 


1917] BOMBARDMENTS 107 


Admiralty, and ask him to approach the proprietors of the most insistent 
paper with a view to having these warnings which were being gratuitously 
given to the enemy stopped, in the highest interests of the country. For 
we were at war. 

I commenced the detailed plans for the Zeebrugge bombardment on 
February roth, 1917, and worked at them for three hours every day when 
I was at Dover, and did not finish the general plan and rough orders till 
March roth, The mass of new details requiring co-ordination was con- 
siderable—method of sailing, position of firing, days when firing was 
possible, auxiliary methods of fixing the positions in which to anchor 
before daylight, so that they would be reasonably accurate; the details 
of the smoke-screen (this was the first occasion for using the motor launch 
screen), the various methods of anchoring the boats and ships according 
to the direction of the wind, the protection of the flank in easterly or 
westerly winds, the orders for spotting for aeroplanes, the orders for firing 
and correcting for range, the transparent grids adjustable in case that the 
actual anchoring position differed from the proposed one, the air attack 
co-operation, the aiming-light arrangements (this was also tried for the 
first time). All these and many more matters had to be weighed and 
digested. It may appear a simple matter to arrange a firing, and so it is ; 
but weeks of thought and work are necessary in order to get as near as 
possible to the maximum of accuracy. The following account of the 
difficulties in carrying out the attack owing to weather conditions, is taken 
from my diary of 1917: 

“‘'The 25th of March was the first day that an attack was possible, 
arrangements were therefore made for this day. Mist came down in the 
afternoon, and I had to cancel them. From now onwards tides not suit- 
able or bad weather. April 8th appeared hopeful, but weather changed 
and had to countermand. Weather continued bad until the next time that 
the tide suited. On April 18th at last made a start. On arrival at Dunkirk 
found that Erebus had swung foul of a destroyer and fouled her own 
propeller ; cleared it at last, only just in time to make start for Zeebrugge. 
Then, in turning on shallow banks, Soult (see page 54) sheered while 
Terror was turning, and parted the tow. It was then too late. Gave up the 
attack and separated the monitors so that the enemy could not see three 
lying together. It was a patience-wearing, cold, and cheerless night ; 
but it is well when several troubles come together.” 

** On Sunday, April 22nd, another start was made, but low cloud neces- 
sitated giving up the attempt at 3.15 a.m. On 24th another attempt was 
made. Hopeless weather.” 

“* After this the Commodore at Harwich had other work on hand, so 
further attempts had to be postponed, as the Admiralty did not wish us to 
attack without the support of some of the Harwich destroyers.” 

“‘ May roth, weather turned promising then turned to haze.”’ 


On May 11th, wind changed to NE. I started at 6 p.m. in the Terror 
with the Erebus and the Soult in tow and usual fleet of M.L.’s, etc., 


108 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL [1917 


passed the North Goodwin nets at 10.15 p.m., and arrived at the firing 
position with all the vessels and commenced firing at 4.45 a.m. On this 
occasion, to check our position for firing, I had arranged for Commander 
Fraser to start in the Lydiard from the North Goodwin, steam straight to 
the firing position at high speed, and lay a buoy; then to go on till he 
sighted the junction of Zeebrugge breakwater with the shore and return 
to the buoy, checking its position by the two reckonings given by the runs 
from Zeebrugge and also from the North Goodwin. 

Now, unexpectedly, we discovered that our position was more accur- 
ately determined by his long run across the North Sea than by the short 
run into and out from the Mole. The effect on the speed of the destroyer 
by the varying depths of the shoal water close to the shore, destroyed the 
accuracy of such a run; this was a useful piece of experience. 

On her way out from sighting the breakwater a torpedo was fired at the 
Lydiard. 'The smoke-screen was quite a success. The Knocke battery 
fired, direction fair, but it was evidently trying up and down for range. 
This accuracy of direction I put down to our black cordite smoke showing 
over the white phosphorus smoke-screen, and I took measures to avoid this 
in future by steaming a destroyer smoke-screen the whole length of the 
white smoke. 

Plate V shows a general view of the lock. Both lock gates were very 
nearly hit. The shooting was good, but not sufficiently promising to lead 
to hope of destroying both gates without unduly wearing the guns, and 
rendering them useless for the important work planned for that summer. 
Firing was stopped owing to the spotting machine exhausting its supply 
of petrol. ‘The relief machine had an engine failure and landed in Holland. 
The aeroplane spotting by Lieutenant Gow was most successfully carried 
out. The machine was in the air for four consecutive hours, and only 
had sufficient petrol to land at Dunkirk. 

While we were busy on the water, a fine fight, or rather series of fights, 
were in progress overhead. The air patrols had been elaborately arranged 
chiefly from the point of view of the protection of our spotting machine ; 
secondly, the driving off of enemy spotters, who could successfully range 
the 12-inch Knocke battery and the 15-inch Jacobssen on to the squadron ; 
and, thirdly, it was well to drive off enemy bombers, for many of our 
vessels were deficient in A.A. guns. Throughout the whole four hours 
our fighters were busily engaged in many cases fighting against superior 
odds. In one case seven of our machines were attacked by a formation 
of fifteen hostile aircraft. 

I had intended going on and bombarding Ostend the same day but 
the haze would have made it difficult to fix, even approximately, our 
position off that port. I was most anxious not to damage the town in 
the opening rounds, so this attack was deferred. 

We tried to get off the attack on Ostend on Sunday, May 13th, 1917, 
but had to turn back at 2 a.m. 

At this time I was bothered by people writing and practically calling 
me a traitor. This was the result of ill-informed newspaper comments. 


ZEEBRUGGE LOCKS 


THE RESULT OF THE BOMBARDMENT OF OSTEND, JUNE 51H, 1917 


The lettered places show where damage was done. The floating dock XX escaped being hit 
on this occasion, but was sunk during the next bombardment. We were able by our methods 
to fire at this small area of about 20 acres without damaging the houses on either side. The 
Inost Important places of damaye were > J, badly damaged, the machine shop > K, b, M,N, O, 
one shop completely destroved and another damaged ; W, the remains of a vessel sunk. 


Prate VI 


1917] BOMBARDMENTS 109 


The following was one of my answers to a clergyman who wrote giving 
his own views and those of his friends : 


‘I have to thank you for your letter and the spirit which prompted 
you to write. 

‘I must apologise for having been so long in acknowledging it; but 
believe me, I have been and am full of work and have but little time for 
my lighter and more amusing correspondence. 

‘* In the wars of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries I believe 
it was not uncommon for an ignorant British public to burn Admirals 
and Generals in effigy, and even sometimes at the moment they were 
gaining victories for the nation. 

‘Should your friends contemplate treating me to a mock auto-da-fé 
I would counsel them to be careful in choosing their dates; otherwise 
they may make themselves as ridiculous as their predecessors in history.” 


Then followed a period of impossible weather. 

On Saturday, May 26th, we again sailed for Ostend and got as far as 
No. 2 buoy, but had to turn back. The wind was off-shore and the smoke- 
screen impossible. 

On June 1st, being rather worn out, I went to Eastbourne in the west 
end of my command, hoping for a week’s rest. But after three days, on 
Monday, June 4th, the weather cleared, so I left with the Erebus and 
Terror at 11 p.m. We went via Dunkirk and the usual patrol route, all 
arrangements being much the same as for Zeebrugge. A successful 
operation was carried out (see Plate VI). We damaged five out of the 
eight principal shops in the dockyard but the floating dock escaped, 
which was a pity. The damage was done at A, B, E, F, G, H, I, K, O, 
P, R, S, and a ship was sunk at W. 

The method of ranging was to drop the first round about 2000 yards 
short of the east estacade, then, when the result had been spotted, to 
lengthen the range by 1500 yards, and, when satisfied as to the direction 
being reasonably correct, to lift straight on to the target. By this means 
any chance of damaging the town with the opening rounds was avoided, 
and it enabled the observer in the aeroplane to see distinctly the opening 
splashes in the water. At any time during the firing a round could be 
dropped, if necessary, for re-ranging, but this was of doubtful utility 
unless the shot could subsequently be spotted on to the actual target. 
The German batteries replied, but could not get us owing to our smoke- 
screen, although several rounds fell fairly close. 

As we were arriving at our anchorage we observed gun-flashes to the 
northward and concluded that Commodore T. from Harwich was at 
work on the German destroyers. I therefore sent our destroyers to try 
and cut off the enemy from Zeebrugge. The Germans, however, were 
able to get in before our boats could intercept them. That morning we 
picked up a useful piece of experience. About half an hour after com- 
mencing firing the monitors suddenly began to roll, which was rather 
upsetting to their aim. The sea that caused this movement was due to 


110 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL [1917 


the fast steaming of the British and German destroyers an hour earlier 
some fifteen miles away. This sea raised by boats steaming remained in 
my mind, and was allowed for in subsequent operations. 

The airmen reported the smoke-screen of the enemy to be most efficient. 
It soon hid the target completely from view. ‘They also observed the 
Tirpitz and Hindenburg batteries to be firing rapid salvos at the fleet 
and the new Jacobssen battery to be firing intermittently with two of her 
15-inch guns which had been placed in position a week or so previously. 

Very little aerial activity was displayed by the enemy on this occasion ; 
probably the handling they had received at the Zeebrugge bombardment 
made them less keen. Our spotting machines and the escorting patrols 
had things very much to themselves. 

I was anxious to destroy the floating dock, and watched the weather 
carefully. On June roth we left at 10 p.m., and, in order to vary the 
route, went straight across the old mine-field and spread the destroyers 
on a broad front, and swept up from the Sandetti to the Ruytingen, 
sending two destroyers up between Cliffe Island and Ratel in case any 
enemy boats were about. The wind turned off shore, and at 2 a.m. we 
turned back. | 

Up to July 5th we could get no further opportunity of bringing off a 
bombardment, so I determined to reinstitute the old barrage-line on the 
coast, so as to have a monitor ready to take advantage any time of the day 
for firing. Also I wanted all the water in the offing in my hands for the 
Great Landing. 

On August 21st, 1917, the Erebus fired a few rounds at Ostend dock- 
yard. From this time onwards the monitors had orders to fire on the 
dockyard at Ostend whenever the weather and wind permitted. Three 
times daily the monitor on patrol reported by special code to the Com- 
modore at Dunkirk what chance there was of a successful firing. If 
favourable, the motor launches were sent out to make a smoke-screen, 
and the aeroplanes, if it were clear enough overhead, were got ready to 
spot. Day after day passed, sometimes without a chance of firing. Some- 
times a favourable report would be made; but the period during which 
the conditions were favourable was frequently found to be too short to 
admit of firing taking place. 

On Saturday, September 15th, at last a chance arose, but the wireless 
of our aeroplane failed. Her messages were not strong enough for the 
Terror to take in. The spare machine close to her took in her ‘‘ Ready 
to spot ” and thought the trouble lay with the Terror, although the latter 
several times signalled to the aeroplane, ‘“‘ Are you ready to spot?” 
This was very disappointing, but occasionally things will go wrong. 
Very little exercise of brain power on the part of the observer in the spare 
machine would have saved the situation. 

On September 22nd the Terror fired on Ostend, and got three hits on 
the dockyard and damaged the floating dock, which was most satisfactory, 
while our airmen bagged three seaplanes that came out. 

After this the Germans gave up Ostend as a sea base. They may have 


1917] BOMBARDMENTS 111 


had a submarine or two under the shelters, but never again was a vessel 
seen in the harbour. The floating dock had a destroyer and submarine 
on it, which were got off. The lock gate was damaged and the basin 
drained to low water mark, when a sunken vessel became visible, the 
result of our previous bombardments. 

On Tuesday, September 25th, Sir John Jellicoe, Admiral Sir Henry 
Oliver, and Admiral Philpots arrived at Dover and accompanied Admiral 
Mayo, U.S.N., and his staff up the patrol line. It was a quaint experience 
for them. Half an hour after leaving Dunkirk in the Broke we lost sight 
of the shore. After an hour’s steaming we sighted the Terror and de- 
stroyers in the open sea, and the motor launches just starting their smoke- 
screen. Nothing else was in sight except a small monitor five miles away 
right out at sea, burning her searchlight as an aiming mark. Really our 
visitors must have thought we were humbugging when the Terror opened 
fire and fired single rounds at fixed intervals. While steaming about in 
the Broke, a few minutes after we had altered course three points, a splash 
came from a Tirpitz shell about 300 yards off ; it fell very near the spot 
where we would have been if we had kept our original course. I apologised 
to the American Chief-of-the-Staff for not having kept on the previous 
course and brought the shell nearer. His reply was quaintly American 
in humour: “ Don’t mention it, Admiral; by the time we get to New 
York that shell will have been close alongside right enough ! ” 

The result of the Terror’s firing was most successful as all the rebuilding 
in the dockyard done by the Germans was again demolished. 

On October roth the Terror was torpedoed and had to be docked. On 
the following day the Soult fired at Ostend and destroyed a high explosive 
magazine.1_ One German craft was sunk and two were damaged. The 
enemy aircraft now began to become a nuisance. Seventeen aeroplanes 
and three German destroyers attacked our destroyers, so I arranged for a 
signal between destroyers and monitors to indicate that they were being 
attacked by aircraft so as to enable the monitors to burst 15-inch shrapnel 
over them among the aeroplanes. 

On the 28th the Erebus was attacked by an electrically controlled motor 
boat and her bulge was badly damaged. 

Our bombardments now ended for the want of places to bombard. It 
was very satisfactory to have started from bed-rock with no methods for 
long-range accurate shooting available, and to have evolved a system 
whereby we could place shells where we liked, with really phenomenal 
accuracy. Moreover, our bombardments had obliged the enemy to aban- 
don the use of Ostend as a harbour, and had practically limited his use 
of Zeebrugge as a base and had driven his vessels up to Bruges, which 
was the only harbour left to him. To complete our work I took measures 
to bombard the docks there by installing 18-inch guns in three of the 
monitors. 

The ships worked splendidly, and I am sure everyone on board had 
good reason to be as proud as I am of the successes they achieved. 


2 Probably that of the anti-aircraft battery to the SE. and close to the dockyard. 


EARLY MORNING 


Lemon dawn of creeping daylight tints the surface of the sea 
Loom dark blotches marking places where the many vessels be. 
Listen ! as the heavy cables through the hawse-pipes clanking run, 
Then a space of busy doings—then the flash of opening gun. 


Watch for shells to ours retorting—watch for Tirpitz! to reply. 

Has he marked us in position ? Has he spotters flying high ? 

Here it comes with screech and thunder, like a score of topsails torn 
From their bolt-ropes when the blizzard strikes the canvas off the Horn. 


So we deal out devastation till the smoke-screen raised ashore 
Blots the vision and our airmen fail to range us any more. 

Cordite, steel, and high explosive, tons of dire destructive power, 
And our months of thoughtful labour stand expended in that hour. 


1 The heavy four-gun battery to the west of Ostend, with guns ranging 
35,000 yards, about 18 miles. 


112 


CHAPTER VII 
THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 


The components of the Flotilla—Their crews—Their hard work—The destroyer 
that asked leave to put out fires—Smal] amount of rest—The 30-knotters— 
Our shortage—Reasons for this—No blame to previous administration— 
Inferiority of our vessels—Bad tactics of German Admiralty—Use of torpedo- 
tubes—Principles of destroyer tactics—Objection to actions off Zeebrugge— 
Difficulties in arranging for the protection of the area—Raids—Action of 
Broke and Swift—Funeral of German officer—Losses in the Flotilla—Work 
of the torpedo-boats. 


T is now fourteen years since the War ended, yet I turn with a thrill 
| of pleasure to revise the chapter I wrote in 1918 on the Sixth Destroyer 
Flotilla. ‘The very words “ Sixth Flotilla’’ bring back a flood of 
memories of incidents and details, largely uninteresting in themselves, 
of gales of wind, snow and fog, hot weather and brilliant sunshine, long 
dark nights, moonlight and haze, and the Flotilla always with steam up, 
always at work. I worked them hard—perhaps it may be said too hard— 
but it had to be done. They were always cheery, always ready for more. 
From the commencement of hostilities down to the end of 1916 no other 
destroyers were attached to the Dover Patrol, except, at times, half a 
dozen good boats which were lent from Harwich to lie at Dunkirk, as a 
reserve to support the Belgian coast patrol; but these were not allowed 
to take part in the work of the Patrol. And here let me at once say that if 
any destroyer officer, or senior officer, objects to the eulogistic term “ In- 
comparable ” being applied to one particular flotilla, let him make allow- 
ance for the feelings of an Admiral who, during the Great War, was served 
so well, so incomparably well, by the destroyers under his command. 
The Sixth Flotilla, the monitors, and the submarines were the only 
vessels manned by active service ratings of the Royal Navy in the Dover 
Command, and these had on board a large sprinkling of men entered for 
“hostilities only.”” The latter did their best, and a good best it was, but 
they lacked the training in boat-work and general Naval duties that all 
the active service ratings in the Navy had received. The sailor—that is 
the old Royal Navy seaman—was apt to view them with an hyper- 
critical eye. Their shortcomings, to him, were more apparent than their 
virtues, and undoubtedly their lives were none the easier for this; but 
the willingness was there, they learned quickly, and they were as plucky 
and enduring as any of the general active service ratings. 
The following story illustrates the unnecessarily superior attitude that 
at times was assumed towards them by active service ratings. A collision 


H 113 


114 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


between two destroyers had occurred, and in one boat a man was badly 
jambed and was shouting a good deal. The Captain of the uninjured 
destroyer told his coxswain, an old sea-dog, to go over the bow into the 
other boat and have the injured man brought on board and put into the 
Captain’s cabin. The coxswain returned and said: ‘‘ You can’t have 
him down there, sir; he’s all covered with blood.’’ ‘‘ Never mind that,”’ 
said the Captain, “‘ we can always clean up afterwards. Go back and tell 
the surgeon to have him brought over.’’ Again the coxswain returned. 
‘I’ve seen the surgeon, sir,”’ he said, “‘ and he says it’s no good, he’s 
bound to die whether he’s moved or not; but you needn’t be put out 
about it, sir, as he’s only one of them joined for hostilities only.” Yes, 
perhaps ; but like a good many others joined hostilities, the ‘‘ only ” 
meant life given in the service of his country. 

The standing routine life of the Dover destroyers was to have steam on 
the engines, either at sea or in harbour, for seventeen days in succession ; 
then to spend three days laid up for boiler cleaning, and once every four 
months they had twenty days in the dockyard for coating the boats’ 
_ bottoms and making defects good. During the seventeen days whenever 
they were in harbour officers and crews remained on their vessels, ready 
to slip instantly to reinforce the Patrol, or to hunt any vagrant submarines 
which might be sighted in the Channel. It was the instant jumping on 
submarines with all available destroyers that kept the narrow waters free 
from their depredations. 

It has been stated that submarines did not operate near Dover because 
they wished us to believe they did not pass. ‘That is all nonsense. But 
they knew that the moment they were sighted in the Narrows they would 
have to go to the bottom and sulk, listening to the waters nearby being 
thrashed by the propellers of their deadly enemies, the destroyers, and 
having their nerves shaken by the detonation of depth charges. The 
targets our ships afforded were many, but they were close inshore and 
well guarded. No! the Dover waters were not healthy as a hunting 
ground for the enemy submarines. Our immunity from losses was bought 
at the expense of overwork by the Sixth Flotilla. The principle I acted on 
was that we were at war. War happened only once in a lifetime, and 
therefore everyone had to be prepared to expend the energy of a lifetime 
during the War. 

On any misty day, with a visibility of, say, not more than five miles, 
the enemy might have tried to raid our cross-Channel troop transports. 
Our force was very weak, but, whatever happened, every destroyer which 
was not cleaning out her boilers would have been ready to engage the 
enemy and attempt to prevent the raid, or to get some satisfaction out 
of him before he escaped. Had we had three times the destroyer force I 
could have arranged for an easier routine; but, as numbers stood, this 
was impossible. 

On one occasion a destroyer arrived from the north, having been lent 
to us to increase our numbers, and, innocently, after making fast to a 
buoy, asked permission to let fires out. This provided amusement to the 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA II5 


Sixth Flotilla for quite a long time. Ordinarily the destroyers had twenty- 
four hours at sea and twenty-four hours in harbour. The Captains were 
almost invariably on deck for the whole time that they were at sea. It 
was not like deep-sea cruising, or convoy work in the open; from one 
minute to another it was impossible to forecast what might turn up; and 
there was usually no time to lose when the “turn up” happened. In 
harbour the boats had to fill up with oil, and then to lay with steam on 
the engine, therefore only the smallest engine defects could then be put 
to rights. 

During the dark periods of the month—that was during the first and 
last quarters of the moon—the majority of the division which was resting 
anchored for the night in the Downs, unless the weather was such that a 
destroyer raid was impossible. This was by no means all joy; for, witha 
wind of any strength from any quarter except WSW. through N. to 
NNE., a sea set into the anchorage ; and, as the destroyers usually rode 
to the tide and not to the wind, they were apt to roll badly. A night’s 
rest under these conditions was more nominal than real. The Captains, 
moreover, when in the Downs usually preferred to sleep in their chart- 
houses. I tried to dissuade them from doing this, since there was always 
time for them, when sleeping below, to be called before the engines could 
be moved and the cable be slipped; but it was easy to appreciate their 
point of view. 

The net result was that at these periods a Captain got only one good 
night’s rest in four; and, if lucky, one day’s rest in four also. It was 
from the boats resting that destroyers had to be provided for taking 
distinguished officials across the Channel. Perhaps these gentlemen can 
now understand why requests for a destroyer were not received with 
overflowing cordiality, but rather grudgingly. It was marvellous how the 
boats were kept running at such high pressure, especially as the Tribals 
were ten to twelve years old, and the 30-knotters had been out of date 
and practically ready for the scrap-heap before the War started. In fact, 
the latter were barely safe for Channel work in the winter of 1917-18. 
Their engine-room staffs and the dockyard officials under Engineer- 
Captain William B. Parsons, Mr. Smart, and Mr. Ramsay, deserve great 
credit for their efficiency, since hardly ever was a boat unable through 
engine defects to take her turn of duty. Nor did the officers and crews 
suffer in health. None of the Captains ever broke down; although, as 
their three days’ stand-off for boiler cleaning approached, they also 
approached their limits of endurance; and I could see by their pinched 
looks that they were badly in need of rest. 

The dispositions of the patrols varied greatly. It should be a governing 
principle to change patrol positions constantly in war time. It is well to 
give the enemy credit for having observed from the air the disposition of the 
patrols, and therefore to be in a position to avoid contact with them. 
For this reason the night patrols were never taken up till after dark, and 
these were varied for every dark period in case the enemy submarines 
had observed their positions. It was largely owing to these precautions 


116 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


that the Broke and Swift, on April 20th, 1917, dropped on the German 
raiders, since no day patrol had ever been placed on the line of retreat 
which I suspected that the enemy would use at night. 

It is an undisputable fact that we had far too few destroyers at the 
commencement of the late War. Why was this? Was anyone culpably 
negligent in the matter of pre-War supply ? Unhesitatingly I say, “‘ No!” 
What led to this shortage was the impossibility of forecasting the trend 
that the War would take, unless human beings had been endowed with a 
spirit of inspired prophecy. It was thoroughly appreciated that the Grand 
Fleet would require destroyers ; but the occupation of the Belgian coast, 
and the consequences which followed from that occupation, were never 
anticipated. If it had not been for the German continued retention of the 
Belgian coast we should not have been greatly deficient in destroyer 
numbers. 

It must also be remembered that approval of the yearly programme 
of Naval construction was extracted from the Government of the day 
with considerable difficulty. Every increase had to be defended; and 
it would not have been easy to supply adequate reasons for doubling our 
destroyer force in peace time. It would have meant adding £16,000,000 
to the construction programme, and a corresponding increase in personnel, 
in order to meet our full requirements. Increase in personnel meant an 
increase in a vast number of unproductive charges, such as training costs, 
barracks, pensions, victualling, etc. etc. It is easy now to blame previous 
administrations for our deficiencies, but it would have been absolutely 
impossible in pre-War days to defend and obtain such an increase. 

Again, our Dover 4-inch Tribals were inferior to the German destroyers 
in some other respects. The reason for allocating the Tribals to Dover was 
that their small fuel-carrying capacity made them unsuited for work with 
the Grand Fleet. This did not militate against their efficiency at Dover ; 
but the six best Tribals mounted only two 4-inch guns against three carried 
by the German boats, and the range of their guns was considerably less. 
Why was this? Well, the Tribals dated back to the original Dreadnought 
programme of 1905. Let us thank Lord Fisher for having insisted on 
oil fuel, and fast, seaworthy boats, rather than quibble because, though 
then they had an armament equal to any destroyer afloat, heavier arma- 
ments had been adopted in the German boats eight years later. The range 
of our guns was limited by the small elevation they could be given. In- 
creased elevation meant increase of weight, and in turn increase of weight 
meant loss of speed. The accepted idea of destroyer actions in pre-War 
days was a “close” action. It was never anticipated that destroyers 
being light, quick-rolling craft, would engage each other at ranges of 
over 12,000 yards. It was, therefore, considered to be unwise to 
handicap speed in order to obtain a range that, most probably, would never 
be used. Who could have anticipated that enemy destroyers would lie 
under the protection of shore batteries and, at a range of 12,000 
yards, shell our boats in the Belgian patrol line? It would have been 
considered to be freak warfare, and so it really was. Although we at 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 117 


Dover suffered from the lack of range in our destroyer guns, I still con- 
sider it to have been a wise decision in 1905 not to sacrifice speed in order 
to procure increased range. In one particular the Germans showed great 
tactical insight, and that was in providing their destroyers with several 
torpedo-tubes. 

If the history of Naval argument in debate could be written, the antagon- 
ism of a certain school of Naval thought to the torpedo would be luridly 
shown up. The uphill work that we younger torpedo officers, in the 
penultimate decade of last century, had in pressing the value of the torpedo 
on the older officers was phenomenal. ‘The idea that the British Fleet 
had only to meet an enemy to beat him was then an ingrained canon of 
Naval opinion.? 

To try and argue that modern weapons had to be met by new tactics, 
and that these innovations could not be discounted, was to be told bluntly 
that the right tactic was to go baldheaded for the enemy in spite of tor- 
pedoes or any other invention. This old theory of warfare took a long 
time to die. It was responsible for the idea that our destroyers should be 
used mainly to fight enemy destroyers. Our fleet could always account 
for the enemy’s fleet, if we could stop their torpedo attacks ; therefore the 
main function of our boats should be to protect our own battleships rather 
than to attack those of the enemy. 

The Germans naturally held the opposite opinion. To them the des- 
troyer offered the means of equalising battleship strength, therefore 
torpedo-tubes were the great essential. Now this, curiously enough, was 
probably responsible for the superior night tactics of the enemy’s destroyers 
—namely, that the torpedo was their first and deadly weapon, and the 
gun only an arm for secondary use. A sounder theory was never started. 
Gun-fire at night, even with good screening,* dazzles the eyes. When the 
eye is straining to catch the faint variations in shade which constitute 
night vision, any sudden access of light is detrimental. The Germans, 
in all our scraps, withheld their gun-fire at first and used their torpedo- 
tubes, like revolvers with deadly effect. This is the only tactic in which, 
so far as I know, the enemy showed any superiority over us. It is only 
fair to credit them with having put into practice in destroyer actions a 
radically new tactical truth. 

As soon as I tumbled to this, I asked the Admiralty to give me any old 
14-inch torpedo-tubes that they could spare, and as usual the department 
of the Director of Naval Ordnance responded splendidly. Dover dock- 
yard was able to fit all our larger boats with two fixed 14-inch tubes, 
which could be discharged from the bridge. 


1 One distinguished admiral, with a considerable reputation as a strategist and 
tactician, was invited to stay with the staff officers of the Vernon to discuss the 
torpedo question. After many hours of debate, his considered opinion was as 
follows : “‘ I cannot believe in the torpedo without losing faith in the battle fleet ; 
as I cannot bring myself to disbelieve in the battle fleet, I cannot believe in the 
torpedo.” 

® Screening is effected by the use of screens, which keep the flash at the 
muzzle of the gun from being seen by those whose duties necessitate acute vision. 


118 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The speed of our destroyers, being old boats, was less than that of the 
Germans. With the Tribals, thirty knots was all on which we could rely. 
In one or two boats, if their bottoms were clean, perhaps thirty-one knots 
could be obtained. The Germans could steam thirty-three knots. No 
doubt this advantage was also emphasised owing to the Germans having 
the initiative ; they could raid any night they liked, docking and cleaning 
their boats immediately before a raid; whereas our boats had to be at 
sea all day, cruise every night, and meet the enemy with dirty bottoms. The 
net result was that we could never overtake them when chasing, and stood 
no chance under such conditions of bringing them to action. 

I have previously mentioned how our shortage of destroyers necessitated 
my husbanding that meagre force. I made it my business never, if I 
could help it, to expose my boats to a superior force of German destroyers. 
It is a cardinal principle in the British Navy to fight the enemy, and not to 
run away; and it cannot be too strongly emphasised that this principle 
should always be acted upon provided that the opposing forces are reason- 
ably matched, or—and this is important—in any case, if your boats 
are fighting on the defensive. To countenance running away is to breed 
dry-rot in any fighting force, and that is why the Germans came to such 
utter grief. Their tip-and-run raids on the Dover Straits absolutely 
destroyed the morale of their officers and men. The idea that their main 
object was to get back to harbour safely, and not that their main functions 
were to attack and sink our vessels, resulted in those raids being an utter 
failure. This extended even to daylight scraps ; for on occasions a superior 
force broke off an engagement with our destroyers and made for home. 
The result was loss of confidence in themselves. Never could the German 
destroyer flotilla on the Belgian coast be looked on as a fighting force. 
It was my endeavour never, if I could avoid it, to put the destroyers in 
a position of inferiority. But in the defence of the Straits this was 
rarely possible. If one destroyer met six in the Channel, it was her 
business to fight and fight to the last. This, needless to say, suited 
our officers and men. ‘They may sometimes have chafed under the 
restrictive orders on the Belgian coast, but in the Straits, when they 
were defending our patrol and traffic, they could, and did, fight all they 
wished. There was no dry-rot in our service. 

When, as was not infrequently the case, the destroyers in harbour were 
turned out at night to reinforce the Patrol, this was done by one of two 
signals—one was for the boats to proceed to the spot indicated singly 
at the utmost speed, and the other signal was to wait, concentrate outside, 
and then to proceed in company. If our traffic line or the unarmed patrols 
were being attacked, I sent the boats at the utmost speed, regardless of 
supporting one another, as one boat at night could frighten several German 
raiders. At all events she would attract the attack off the unarmed vessels, 
and her supports would arrive in succession at short intervals.1 But if 
merely a gun-fire raid was in progress, then the matter became one of 
fighting the German division, and the boats were delayed to sail in com- 

1 Numbers, at night, are tactically of far less importance than in daylight. 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 11g 


pany. It is true that in the first place the boats incurred risks of being 
sunk in succession, but such risks had to be incurred, for it increased the 
morale of the unarmed patrol to know that help would be coming at the 
maximum rate. 

Again in 1915 and 1916, our destroyers being few and the boats having 
often to work singly, whenever the disposition of the patrols was altered 
I used to meet all the Captains of the boats and explain my views, and 
discuss the possible trend of events, the probable action of the enemy, and 
the reasons that underlay my dispositions. By this means the Captains 
knew my views and how to carry out the spirit of their orders in case 
totally unexpected conditions arose. Later on, when the boats became 
more numerous, and worked in divisions, I saw the leaders only. Sucha 
procedure was of the greatest value; for, whatever might happen, I knew 
that the commanding officers would act to attain the common end we had 
in view according to the best of their judgment at the moment. But it was 
further necessary to lay down in writing the principles that were to govern 
the actions of the destroyers for the information of boats newly arriving in 
the Patrol. 

One particular form of operation which I disliked more than any other, 
was that of trying to cut off the German destroyers among our mine-fields 
near the Dutch coast.!_ On such occasions we had only vague information 
that some of their vessels were out; their numbers were unknown. My 
destroyers were priceless to me for the defence of the Straits. I could not 
replace any that might be lost, whereas the enemy had large numbers to 
draw on. A night scrap is always a toss-up, and, unless it develops into a 
chase in the open, is largely a matter of luck. If my boats were damaged 
they would be taken by the flood-tide over our mine-fields towards 
Zeebrugge, where salvage in daylight would be very difficult. The game 
was never worth the candle. ‘The fewness of the number of destroyers 
available at Dover made it undesirable to allow them to be entangled 
off the enemy’s ports in an engagement with an uncertain number of 
enemy vessels at night. The course decided on between the Admiralty 
and myself after much discussion was, that the Harwich force should be 
looked on as the main attacking body ; they, however, were not permitted 
to pass to the southward of a certain definite line unless engaging the 
enemy; our vessels, on the other hand, were not allowed to pass to 
the northward of a similar line, so that no regrettable incident between the 
two forces could occur. The Dover force was to supplement the Harwich 
attack, by cutting off the enemy from Zeebrugge ; but, unless the enemy 
were engaged by the Harwich force, our boats were to lie to the westward 
of our mine-fields. Taking into account our small numbers, the work 
they had to do daily and the proximity of the place of probable action to 
Zeebrugge, this decision was a wise one. In view of our shortage of des- 
troyers, it would have been an unjustifiable gamble deliberately and un- 
supported to court the chances of a night scrap with an enemy of unknown 
strength close to his harbours. I have no doubt that our destroyer crews, 

1 See chart of patrol, latitude 51° 30’ N., longitude 3° 10’ E. 


120 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


both officers and men, chafed under such restrictions, but an Admiral 
should use his vessels to the best possible advantage to the country, even 
if in so doing outlets for gallantry are denied to those serving under him. 

Up to the autumn of 1916, the enemy’s destroyers had never ventured 
into the Narrows at night. But on every night precautions had been 
taken to defend our vital points. In an offensive, the Admiral should, of 
course, be afloat, except in small undertakings, when obviously it is 
only fair to give the senior officer of the Flotilla charge of an operation. 
But in the event of an attack on the Straits, the right place for the flag 
officer was ashore, at the centre of the system of telephonic communica- 
tion and in close touch with the signal station. It was useless, in so large 
an area, in case of tip-and-run raids, to attempt to control dispositions 
when afloat ; as the probability was that, wherever his vessel might be, 
it would be at least ten miles away from the actual point of attack. 

It might perhaps have been an advantage if some civilian critics of the 
Patrol could have sat in the office of the Vice-Admiral at Dover on a pitch- 
dark night, with the lights out and the window open, waiting for the sound 
of gun-fire or the reports of gun-fire, from Dunkirk or from any of the 
many stations between Beachy Head and the North Foreland. In 
conversation they would have learnt the small number of our protecting 
destroyers ; the different places where the enemy might turn up, and the 
exact position every quarter of an hour of our own vessels; the real 
points the Vice-Admiral had to defend and those places which, perforce, 
had to be left undefended; the chances that existed against the enemy 
being brought to action, and his clear knowledge that, if the probable 
happened, a howl would be raised in some newspapers next day and 
questions would be asked in Parliament as to what the Admiral at Dover 
was doing. To that query no satisfactory answer could be given, because 
to do so would have been to expose the inadequacy of our force available 
for defence. Such visitors, hasty and ill-informed, if well-intentioned, 
would then perhaps have grasped that the best way to help their country 
during war, was not by ignorant criticism of every untoward event, but by 
leaving censure or blame to the responsible authorities. They might 
further have guessed that, although the Admiral probably laughed, and 
said he did not “‘ care a damn ”’ for the Press or Parliament, the prospect 
of the next day’s comments did not help him to bear his very heavy load 
of responsibility ; especially as he knew that such comments would in- 
fallibly undermine his reputation with the nation, and most certainly not 
increase the confidence in him of such of his officers and men who were 
ignorant of the true conditions underlying the work of the destroyer patrol ; 
for only the Admiral had all the cards exposed, and knew the weakness of 
his hand. 

On October 26th, 1916, information was received from our air recon- 
naissance that considerable train activity and movement of barges were 
noticeable at Ostend. Armed barges had also been seen in the canals, as 
well as the presence in the harbour of additional destroyers. These 
additional destroyers at Ostend, combined with the discovery of armed 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 121 


barges in the canals and abnormal train activity at Ostend, made me 
more anxious regarding an attack on that portion of the Belgian coast 
which was occupied by the Allies than one in the Channel. Additional 
German destroyers had previously been sent to Ostend, and had then been 
used to try and catch our patrol in the early morning and to force our 
vessels from the patrol line, in which attempt they had been unsuccessful. 
On other occasions their presence appeared to be due to escort duties. 
Moreover, I had entirely suspended the night transport of our troops, a 
fact of which I imagined the enemy had complete knowledge, so that, 
apparently, no useful military purpose would be gained by their entering 
the Straits. 

The Downs, however, was always a weak spot. The two places, there- 
fore, which I considered required the most safeguarding on the night of 
October 26-27th were the Belgian coast and the Downs. 

The destroyer force at my disposal was one division of eight boats lent 
from Harwich for work with the Belgian coast barrage, three 4-inch 
Tribals, three 12-pounder Tribals, eight 30-knotters, four P boats, and two 
torpedo-boats. These I disposed as follows: One half-division of Harwich 
boats in the Downs; one half-division of Harwich boats and four 30- 
knotters at Dunkirk; one monitor and a French T.B. at La Panne to 
cover the beach to the eastward; the Tribals (with the exception of the 
Zulu, which was on the Beachy Head patrol) in Dover with steam at ten 
minutes’ notice. 

The Tribals, assisted by 30-knotters and P boats, had daily to undertake 
the whole of the patrols, and the usual escort work in the Straits. Latterly, 
owing to the presence of submarine boats to the westward, I had been 
obliged to strengthen the traffic patrol in the day-time and double the 
escort, so that the whole of the Tribals were out on duty every day and had 
to rest in Dover for the night. 

The Patrol for the night placed the Fhkrt, a 30-knotter, with the drifters, 
in the eastern area of the Channel ; she was stationed there as an assistance 
to them should a submarine be sighted or get into the moored nets. No 
attempt was made to provide for a defence of the Straits against a raid, 
nor could such defence be attempted with the vessels I then had at my 
disposal, if reasonable rest and sleep was to be allowed to the officers and 
men. To defend the Straits against a raid a considerably greater number 
of destroyers than that which the raiding force could bring to bear would 
have been required in order to cover successfully the twenty-mile line of 
approach and yet to be in reasonable force at any point where the enemy 
might turn up. Of course these numbers were not available. 

Four divisions of drifters were patrolling the net line between the 
Goodwin and the Ruytingen buoy. The yacht Ombra and the trawler 
H, E. Stroud, wireless vessels, were attending on them. 

It is always difficult to piece together the true facts of a night raid ; 
but so far as could be gathered the enemy sent two divisions of destroyers 
of six boats each. They arrived round the east end of the net barrage— 
which then only extended to the Ruytingen—and divided, one lot steaming 


122 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


for Gris-Nez and the other for Dover. The latter boats were sighted 
by the destroyer Fkrt, who at first took them in the darkness for our 
Dunkirk boats returning to Dover. She did not appreciate that move- 
ments of this nature by destroyers at night rarely took place near the 
patrol line in the Channel, and that, in the event of their being made, the 
patrols were always warned that such a movement was about to take place. 

Subsequently the Firt heard gun-firing, and proceeded in the direction 
of the flashes. At Dover the firing was also heard, and I ordered out the 
Tribals which were resting, told the boats in the Downs to weigh, so as to 
be ready to meet an attack on the shipping, and also warned the Com- 
modore at Dunkirk. But I did not move the Dunkirk division until I 
was certain that the French coast was not the real object of attack, and 
that the Channel business was not merely a diversion. 

The Firt soon saw men floating in the water and stopped to pick 
them up, putting on her searchlight to do so. The First Lieutenant and 
another hand went away in her boat to pick up the men, and learned that 
they were part of the crew of a drifter. The searchlight showed up the 
position of the Fkrt and she was immediately attacked and sunk by two 
enemy destroyers. Not one soul—except those in the boat which was 
picking up the drifter’s crew—was saved, and strange to relate no flotsam 
from the wreck was ever afterwards seen. 

The enemy destroyers sank six drifters and damaged three others and 
one trawler. Forty-five officers and men were killed, four were recovered 
wounded, and one officer and nine men were taken prisoners by the 
Germans. The Dover Tribals were not long in arriving, among which 
were the Amazon, Lieutenant Guy Warren, the Nubian, Commander 
Mountague Bernard ; and the German boats made off. Meanwhile the 
other enemy division had made for Gris-Nez, steered up the Folkestone- 
Boulogne transport route, and overhauled and sank by gun-fire the 
Queen, an empty transport, after first boarding and taking away her 
papers. 

As all was quiet on the French north coast I called the Dunkirk division 
to the Channel to try and cut off the raiders ; but as our destroyers had 
nearly one hour’s steaming to do before they could reach the scene of 
action, they were too late to be of any service. 

The Amazon was considerably damaged by shell-fire, and the Nubian 
had her fore part almost severed by the explosion of a torpedo. It is 
difficult to say exactly what damage was done to the enemy. At first the 
reports received led me to believe that two of them had been blown up 
on crossing the net line, as the times of reported explosions varied 
considerably from that of the torpedo which struck the Nubian, nor was 
it probable that gun flashes would be mistaken for submerged explosions ; 
but no confirmatory evidence of such damage was subsequently received. 
I much regretted the loss of the gallant drifter crews. 

The loss of the Queen was unfortunate. She could easily have been 
salved if all the reports received from her crew had not definitely stated 
that she “‘ had been sunk” by gun-fire, whereas as a matter of fact she did 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 123 


not sink until she had drifted, some three hours afterwards, nearly up 
to the South Goodwins. It was, however, a matter for satisfaction that 
the possibility of such a night raid had been foreseen and that I had 
abolished all night sailings of troops. Had the night sailings been in 
force a disaster of some magnitude must have resulted. 

On the drifters fell the bulk of the attack. They, of course, were merely 
unarmed patrols, unable to defend themselves. It might have been 
expected that after this occurrence they would have been shy of their 
night patrol, but they were quite unaffected. In fact, a report having got 
about that they did not relish watching the barrage at night, the skippers 
went in a body to the Captain of the Drifter Patrol and said that, so far 
from not liking to do night patrols, they were ready, should I wish it, to 
lay their nets and watch them off Zeebrugge at night. Their pluck was 
always magnificent, for, mind you, there is a vast difference in patrolling 
in a vessel that can reasonably answer an attack and one provided with a 
single rifle and a few rounds of ammunition, which was all the defence 
with which the drifters were provided. 

The net result of the raid was to cause an increased destroyer force to 
be sent to Dover, several of the Phcenix class being attached to the Patrol, 
and a corresponding number of the Harwich force withdrawn. 

The Nubian was taken in tow and brought close to the eastern entrance 
of Dover ; but meanwhile it had come on to blow from the south-west, 
the tow-ropes unfortunately parted and the Nubian went on the shoal 
chalk reef which stretches out from the South Foreland. Here she left 
her bow behind, and at high water the remainder was driven close up 
under the cliff. In this position she rode out two gales of wind, but 
eventually was brought into Dover. The Zulu, which shortly before had 
been mined, had lost her stern. The bow of the Zulu was joined to 
wee stern of the Nubian, and a sound destroyer, christened the Zudian, 
resulted. 

The next raid took place on November 23rd, when six enemy boats 
were seen near the Downs, and at 10.45 p.m. a German Flotilla tried to 
pass inside the south entrance to the Downs. These destroyers, each 
armed with three 4-inch guns, opened fire on the night patrol of the 
Ramsgate drifters, each armed with a 6-pounder.’ The drifters returned 
the fire and the destroyers made off. The drifter Acceptable was hit ; but, 
as was invariably the case, the drifters did not hesitate to stand up to 
the enemy destroyers in spite of the futility of their armament. So 
hurriedly did the enemy run from our little drifters that our destroyers 
were unable to arrive at the spot in time to cut them off. The German 
official version issued at the time is worth quoting : 


“Parts of our naval forces made a reconnoitring expedition on the 
night between November 23rd and 24th, to the Estuary of the Thames 
and the Downs. Apart from an outpost ship which was sunk, no hostile 


1 The Ramsgate drifters were armed with a 6-pounder merely to enforce the 
traffic regulation. 


124 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


naval forces were seen. The fortified base of Ramsgate was bombarded 
by German artillery, but when no English Fleet was still visible our Fleet 
returned to its base, where it arrived safely.” 


Ramsgate was not bombarded; no vessel was sunk; and six large 
destroyers ran away from six little fishing boats, and the destroyers which 
they momentarily expected would be down upon them ! 

The next adventure of the German destroyers was on March rst, 1917, 
when the destroyer Laverock, on patrol in the Channel, was hit by a 
torpedo which did not explode, while a second division of enemy boats 
made an attack on Broadstairs. 

The attack on Broadstairs was a dangerous threat to the merchant 
vessels anchored near by, and I put forward proposals for further strength- 
ening the defence of the Downs. 

On March 23rd a third attempt was made on the Channel patrol line 
near Calais; and, about two hours afterwards, a bombardment of Rams- 
gate was carried on for a few minutes. 

The next raid took place on April 17th. Our first intimation was at 
10.50 p.m. when H.M.S. Paragon was torpedoed. The evidence of the 
survivors showed : 


(a) That the Paragon was hit by a torpedo while challenging. 
(5) The enemy fired a few rounds. 

(c) The Paragon returned fire and fired a torpedo. 

(d) The Paragon sank in eight or nine minutes. 


‘*H.M.S. Laforey arrived on the scene about ten minutes after and 
burnt her searchlight to pick up survivors. H.M.S. Llewellyn arrived 
shortly afterwards and switched on her searchlight. 

“At about 11.15 p.m. the Llewellyn was torpedoed, presumably by 
the same destroyers. 

“* The Llewellyn at 10.51 p.m. had reported heavy firing in the direction 
of Calais. Calais reported firing ceased at 11 p.m. At 11.13 p.m. a signal 
from the Laforey was received that she was picking up survivors. 
reserve boats in Dover were ordered to slip. 

‘* At 11.28 p.m. a signal was received from the Laforey that the Paragon 
and Llewellyn had been torpedoed and that she was picking up survivors. 
At 11.40 p.m. this was corrected to read, ‘ sunk by submarine.’ It seemed 
from this as if a submarine was stalking the boats on patrol. 

*‘ At 11.40 p.m. I therefore stopped the reserve boats from Dover and 
told them to return, and ordered out P 21 and P11 to hunt for the 
submarine in the eastern part of the patrol line, and at 11.50 p.m. ordered 
the destroyers on the patrol line to fall back five miles to the westward 
of the normal line and patrol at good speed. It was not till 12.20 a.m. 
that I received the signal that the Llewellyn was not sunk, and that she 
and the Laforey had only two of the Paragon’s survivors on boarc. I 
therefore, at 12.30, ordered out six motor launches to look for survivors. 
The Llewellyn’s position was asked for and a tug was sent to her assistance. 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 125 


“‘ At 1.7 a.m. I received a signal to say that survivors of the Paragon 
report that they saw ‘ enemy’s destroyers.’ 

“This quite altered the situation. I therefore at once stopped the 
P boats going to the barrage, since, though suitable for hunting sub- 
marines, they were quite unable to deal with destroyers. Sent P 11 to 
relieve the Laertes which was escorting the Llewellyn, and recalled the 
other P boat to harbour. At the same time I sent the Myngs and Lark 
to reinforce the destroyers on patrol. The Llewellyn arrived at Dover at 
4.30 a.m. 

“‘In the meantime at 12.44 a.m. Leathercoats Signal Station reported 
heavy gun-fire in a NE. direction, and Ramsgate in an easterly direction. 
At 12.47 a.m. T.B. 24 reported enemy’s destroyers bombarding Margate. 
The Canterbury in the Downs reported at 0.41 a.m. that she was proceed- 
ing with Downs destroyers. 

‘* It appears that three or four enemy destroyers approached the North 
Foreland from the NE., passed close to the 8.8. Greypoint and torpedoed 
her,? returned to the westward and fired shell at our drifters and at 
Ramsgate, turned to the NE. close past the S.S. Greypoint again and 
steamed away to the NE. 

‘“‘'The damage done ashore was slight; three houses were hit but no 
casualties. The drifter Paramount was hit in several places, and I regret 
to say that the Skipper and two hands were severely injured. The S.S. 
Greypoint should not have been at anchor in the North Downs. She 
had started for the Thames, but her engine had broken down and she 
anchored, being unable to proceed.” 


In my report to the Admiralty I stated : 


‘“* The raids on the Dover Patrol line are most difficult to deal with, 
and for clearness I sum up the situation in the following sentences : 

(a) As regards the barrage attack. 

‘‘ The enemy need only keep a rigid look-out when close to the Straits 
for one hour on a definite night, and fire a torpedo at anything he sees 
and run away. Our boats have night after night to keep a look-out for 
the whole night, and we are never immediately absolutely certain whether 
vessels seen are enemy’s or friends. The look-out kept must, for physical 
reasons, be inferior to that of the enemy. : 

“The enemy can vary the time of attack at will and choose his night. 
He can predetermine whether to ‘shoot and scoot,’ or to carry out a more 
or less prolonged attack. The best disposition of my destroyers differs 
in each of these two forms of attack. 

‘* I must cover the whole breadth of the Straits. The enemy can attack 
at a point. 

‘“‘ I must rest my boats’ crews, officers and men, and therefore can only 


1 An excellent example of how inaccurate wording of reports by signal may 
cauge totally wrong dispositions to be made. 

* The Greypoint was the only merchant vessel sunk or hit by German destroyers 
in their raids in the Channel and Downs. 


126 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


keep a proportion under weigh, and he can rest his crews every night 
except the one he may choose for an attack in force. We have to be 
prepared every night, not only for destroyers, but to look out for sub- 
marines and raiders and other vessels trying to pass through the Straits. 

“*(b) As regard the ratds on the coast. 

‘* The enemy can choose the night and time and which part of the coast 
he wishes to attack. My main preoccupation is to cover and protect the 
shipping in the Downs. The enemy can attack from the north or south, 
or, at certain states of the tide, cross the Goodwins, or shell the shipping 
from the eastward of the Goodwin Sands. I must therefore keep my 
vessels near the shipping so as to be in a position to deal with any of 
these forms of attack. My vessels are resting, so called, after day work ; 
therefore they must anchor. 

‘The shore raids are comparatively harmless, and, therefore, the 
protection of the shipping, which is the more important of the possible 
objectives, must receive first consideration. 

“‘'The problem is a difficult one owing to every point being in the 
enemy’s favour in this class of ‘ shoot and scoot ’ warfare ; but I am very 
hopeful that we may yet give him a lesson; and one serious blow will, 
without doubt, make him less eager to carry out these raids.” 


The last paragraph of the above proved to be prophetic, for the next 
raid proved to be the last the enemy made during the tenure of my com- 
mand, as his raiding destroyers were this time—April 2oth-21st—engaged 
by the large destroyer leaders Swift and Broke. 

It is difficult to disentangle the true facts of this raid on the Channel 
on the night of April 2oth-21st. From a general review of all the evidence, 
I believe that a division of six enemy boats took part. ‘Two boats went to 
Calais and four off the Maloja wreck vessel. The firing at Calais com- 
menced about 11.10 p.m. and lasted seven to eight minutes. The firing 
at Maloja began at 11.30 p.m. and lasted about the same time. The 
trawler Sabreur was fired on and hit; one man was wounded and a con- 
siderable number of shells was fired blindly into the county of Kent. The 
destroyers left the Maloja position, then steamed NE. by E. to No. 3a 
buoy, while the Swift and Broke were at the east end of their line, and back 
on a SW. course missing them again. They probably met and joined up 
with the Calais boats at No. 3a buoy about 0.45 a.m. 

At 0.50 a.m. they steamed about ESE. to return home, and this time 
passed close to the Swift and Broke on the west patrol, portside to port- 
side on nearly opposite courses. The Swift put her helm hard a-starboard 
and increased to full speed ; the Broke did the same. The Swift passed 
through or behind the line, failing to ram partly because the Captain was 
affected by the blinding effect of the foremost gun. He fired a torpedo 
which probably hit G 85 on the starboard quarter. The Broke fired also 
at G 85 and either hit her with her torpedo or mistook the explosion of 
the Swift's torpedo (if this was the torpedo that hit) for her own torpedo. 


1 The distance separating these two points is twenty miles. 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 127 


The Broke then rammed G 42. After this the Swift followed the retreating 
boats without sufficiently damaging any to cause them to drop in speed. 
The Broke came under the fire of another destroyer and suffered consider- 
able damage from her gun-fire. The Broke claimed to have torpedoed 
this destroyer also. After this the Broke’s engines were out of action. 

The Captains of the Swift and Broke, Commanders Ambrose Peck and 
E. R. G. R. Evans, both distinguished themselves by immediately adopting 
the correct tactics of using or trying to use the ram and torpedo. The 
difficulties of so doing on a dark night, when partially blinded by gun 
flashes, is great, especially as the difference between being the rammer or 
the rammed is merely a case of a small difference of judgment. It is most 
satisfactory to note that all the officers and men are praised by their 
respective Captains. I had to reduce the list sent in by the Captains of 
officers and men recommended, as they embraced all the officers and a large 
proportion of the total complement of the vessels. Not only did the 
officers and men fulfil their assigned duties, but, as emergencies arose, the 
officers, as might be expected, and the men rose to the occasion, and 
reorganised and supplemented deficiencies. 

Commanders Peck and Evans were promoted to Post Captains, and 
awarded the D.S.O. for their gallant conduct on this occasion. The 
conduct of Mr. Donald A. Gyles, Midshipman, R.N.R., of H.M.S. 
Broke, and Sidney Clarke, Able Seaman, O.N., J.5244, Herbert T. H. 
Fowler, Ordinary Seaman, O.N., SS.7516, William G. Rowles, Able 
Seaman, O.N., 201767, Leonard Robertson, Able Seaman, O.N., SS.5060, 
all of H.M.S. Broke, who continued at their duty in spite of wounds, is 
worthy of special commendation. 

This affair, from the point of view of the protection of the Straits of 
Dover, presents several points of interest. Whether the enemy did or did 
not stumble on our patrols was largely a matter of luck. If they had not 
done so the ten minute bombardments of Calais and Dover would have 
produced a howl from the public which would have been out of all 
proportion to the damage done, or the way our material interests in the 
Dover area had been safeguarded. 

By changing the entire disposition of the patrol after dark the enemy 
was kept in ignorance of the fact that we had a western patrol. 

The Germans had used their destroyers in futile operations in order 
to feed an ignorant public on inaccurate accounts of useless operations ; 
hence, they had been taught wrong tactics. The main tactic of a futile 
raid is to run away, 80 as not to be caught, hence their boats learned to run 
and not to fight, with a result that six of their boats ran from two of ours. 

It is interesting to trace what actually happened to the Broke after 
colliding with the German destroyer. The diagram on the following page 
shows that the Swift and Broke were in line ahead when they sighted 
the German division portside to portside. The Stift at once starboarded 
and the Broke followed, both fired their port torpedoes at G 85 and at 
least one took effect. The Swift fired the 6-inch gun which had been 
mounted on her fo’c’sle, and her Captain and all on the bridge were 


128 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


PHASE J. . ‘PHASE 2, 
“BROKE ‘ano “Si éicnT CORMAN T.B.DESTROYERS ane Acree Counse.| “Barone ane ‘Swiet mine Tonpeooes ar NEAREST DesTRover 
WHICH 9 SEEN ro se mt. “Swif T° acso FIREO nea Gay Gun. 


B. DESTROYERS, 
OF TORPEDOES 


"Sunk T" BUNDEO ev wean Gun FLase PASSES ASTERN or GERMAN SPEED or BROKE CAUSED ute rem CEAMAN DESTHOVER re SwwiG 
LINE. “BROKE” Rams LAST DESTROYER, Tanouon 12 Ponts yo PORT, LOCKED TOGETHER, 


J 
z 
: 

8 


Cerman T.B8.DestRover 
TORPEOOED m PHase a9 5 


“A 


*Broxe” sees Enemy DESTROYER on STARBOARD SIDE ano Ag BROKE” INCORRECTLY CONJECTURED. 

Fires TORPEDO, REPORTS tnaY sue TORPEDOED ra LAST 

DESTROYER wm THe LINE, BECAUSE Swe HAD NOT APPRECIATED Q WJ 
2.2 

Seq HAD SWUNG ronovon 12 POINTS er THOUGHT We CONDITIONS 3 


WERE as at Prase 6, | 3.3 
45 


PRE VIOUSLY 
TORPEDOEQ, Wy ~” 


‘Broa 6. 


Tr15 BOAT SEEN ow BROKE'S” 
STARBOARD was ACTUALLY 
DESTROYER No, 5, 


DIAGRAM_ILLUSTRATING ACTION BETWEEN HMS ‘Swirt ano HMS BROKE: 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 129 


blinded. She, therefore, lost sight of the enemy for several seconds, 
and passed astern of G 42, which was the last boat of the line. Imme- 
diately she saw her on her port side, she starboarded, and came up on 
the starboard quarter of the German destroyers and chased them, keeping 
up a running fight, until, badly holed in the bow, she took in so much 
water that her speed was hopelessly reduced. The Broke in the mean- 
time, after firing her torpedo saw G 42 on her starboard bow, and star- 
boarded? and rammed her abaft the after funnel. Now the effect of the 
thirty-knot speed of G 42 and a similar speed on the Broke crashing in 
aft was for the two destroyers to swing violently to port, probably through 
nearly sixteen points. This was not appreciated by the Broke’s officers, 
who had plenty to think about in their engagement with the German 
destroyer. The next thing Commander Evans saw was a destroyer on his 
starboard side—this really was G 85 which had been already torpedoed. 
But not appreciating that his boat had swung nearly sixteen points to 
port, he thought it was another boat astern of the one he had rammed, and 
fired another torpedo and hit the same boat a second time. 

This led to three boats being claimed ; the one originally torpedoed on 
his port side, the boat he rammed, and the boat he torpedoed on his star- 
board side ; whereas the one torpedoed on his port side, and afterwards 
on his starboard side, were one and the same boat. 

Attention was now directed to capturing the boat rammed and securing 
prisoners. Then getting clear of G 42, which soon after sank, the Broke 
approached G 85, on the fo’c’sle of which one or more men cried 
‘* Kamarad,”’ but the after 4-inch gun still continued to fire at the Broke. 
A third torpedo sank her. 

This point of surrender at night is an interesting one. In day-time the 
official signal of surrender is to haul down the ensign, and this is an order 
that should be obeyed by the crew. Individual surrenders are quite 
properly ignored so long as the ensign is flying. At night-time there is 
no official signal of surrender ; no individual cries of surrender should be 
accepted as official until the senior officer notifies that he has surrendered. 
Calling out ‘ Kamarad ”’ on the fo’c’sle, was not an act of treachery, it was 
merely surrender on the part of individuals. The after-part, which is 
the quarter-deck, never surrendered, and G 85 went down still firing her 
after 4-inch gun in a gallant manner, and deserves to be honoured for so 
ending her career. Both the Swift and Broke sustained considerable 
damage ; the casualties were not as many as might have been anticipated. 

In the published announcement I remarked that “ fortunately’ we 
were able to save the lives of many Germans. It is almost incredible how 
that word “ fortunately,” emphasised by the indefatigable exertions on 
the part of certain newspapers, was at once seized upon by people all over 
England, who took the opportunity of writing me vituperative letters, 
both signed and anonymous. Women especially displayed a vindictiveness 
that was next door to fiendish. It was remarkable how one and all looked 

1 “* Starboarded ”’ is, of course, correct, on account of the speed of the enemy’s 
destroyers. 

I 


130 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


on the sinking of the Lusttania by a submarine as precluding all possibility 
of recognising bravery on the part of the enemy in a destroyer action. 

In writing that Press notice, I inserted “ fortunately’ on purpose, 
and I am glad that I did so, in spite of the personal inconvenience it after- 
wards caused me. I was anxious to convey to the Patrol my approbation 
of their having fought honourably and as gentlemen, as the Navy has always 
fought, and of their having tried, after the action, in accordance with old 
Navy traditions, to save as many of the foes as possible. A spirit of 
savagery was much to be deprecated, and tendencies in that direction 
were being rather stimulated by current publications. A memorandum 
to the Patrol on the subject was needless, and might have been looked 
on as almost insulting. Again the more prisoners that were taken the 
better was the chance of getting information, and checking the information 
given by the various witnesses. Much that was of value was elicited from 
the survivors. I repeat that we were indeed “ fortunate ’’ for both the 
above reasons, in saving a considerable number of the Germans. 

Another matter which added fuel to the fire of recrimination was my 
sending a wreath to the funeral of the German officer who was buried at 
Dover with an inscription ‘‘ To a brave enemy,” which was expanded by 
some of the daily newspapers into “‘ brave and gallant enemy.”” The reason 
for this act, which certainly was not a customary one, was as follows. A 
few months previously one of our airmen of the Dover Command—a 
gallant boy—had been killed over Ostend. Shortly afterwards a German 
aeroplane dropped on the Dunkirk aerodrome a parcel containing a few 
trifles which had been found on him, a piece of the ribbon of the wreath 
placed on his grave, and a photograph of his funeral and grave, with a 
request that they might be sent to his relations. This was a graceful 
act; and, at the time, I determined that the next German officer buried 
in my command should also have a wreath to show that, in honouring the 
dead, we were not behind the Germans. Plate VIII may be of interest, 
being a copy of one of the two photographs that the Germans dropped. 

The general principles that I followed in arranging our dark period 
patrols in the Channel during the remainder of 1917, were for the des- 
troyers to patrol in units of four boats, and the destroyer leaders in a 
unit composed of two or three vessels ; to have these units patrolling on 
lines to cover, with as short a steaming distance as possible, the points 
the enemy were likely to select for starting their lightning bombardments ; 
that one end of each of the lines that were being patrolled should be 
within sight of some navigational light, so that the position of the boats 
could be frequently checked ; that the turn at each end was to be made at 
definite times, so that I knew by a glance at the clock, at any moment, 
the position of each patrol; and, lastly, that where independent patrol 
lines approached even moderately near to each other, the times of turning 


1 T hate quoting Nelson in 1798 for an action in 1917; but in a case of Naval 
ethics, his example is to be prized. One of his chief preoccupations during the 
battle of the Nile, after the Orient had caught fire, was to send away boats to 
save her crew. 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 131 


were arranged so that.the two patrols were at the western or eastern ends 
of their patrol line simultaneously, and therefore throughout the night 
could never accidentally at any moment be near to each other. By this 
means the areas were covered in the most economical manner, and 
without any possibility of friendly patrols sighting each other. Each 
patrol, therefore, had orders to attack, torpedo and sink any destroyers 
sighted, without compunction or doubt, or suffering the loss of time which 
must perforce be incurred in challenging; a fundamentally important 
point which had been emphasised by several untoward experiences. Had 
the system been kept in force by my successor during 1918, the German 
destroyers, which were permitted to attack the vertical mine-field, would 
infallibly have been brought to action, for no doubt could have existed 
that the boats which were on that night sighted by our destroyers were 
those belonging to the enemy. 

On April 27th Ramsgate was shelled by enemy destroyers. Two 
civilians, unfortunately, were killed and three were wounded. After this 
the Marshal Ney, which was permanently anchored in the Downs, the 
6-inch batteries that had been lately erected at Foreness and the North 
Foreland, and the extension of the North Goodwin nets stopped all 
future raids in 1917. 

The Tribals of the Sixth Flotilla during 1915-17, lost half their number 
owing to mines and torpedoes. The first to be mined was the Maori, 
Lieutenant-Commander B. W. Barrow, off Zeebrugge, in April 1915. 
I much regretted the loss of the services of Lieutenant-Commander 
Barrow, who was a most able destroyer officer. 

The next destroyer to be mined was the Mohawk; she was blown up, 
as bad luck would have it, in the very first mine-field laid by the German 
submarines in the Channel. In the early morning while patrolling near 
the NW. end of the net area, some mines were seen close to her; her 
helm was put over to clear them, but a strong east-going tide swept her 
over them. She was towed into Dover with her upper-deck almost level 
with the water. 

The Viking was mined in a known dangerous area not far from Boulogne. 
Instead of this dangerous area having been accurately marked by a circle 
on her chart, a general pencil notation ‘* Mines’ had been written. 
This accident emphasised how necessary it is to exercise meticulous 
attention to orders on all occasions. It was the old tale of familiarity 
breeding want of care. 

One peculiar point about this accident was that the after oil tank 
caught fire and sent up a great column of smoke, which made it appear 
as if the whole boat must inevitably be consumed by fire ; however, as 
soon as she was taken in tow the fire was automatically extinguished ; the 
reason being that the smoke was caused by a burning patch of oil har- 
boured in the wreckage, which patch was continually being fed by fresh 
oil bubbling up from the damaged tank. As soon as motion was got on 
to the vessel this burning patch was washed out, and no flame remained 
to ignite the oil coming to the surface. On boarding her I found that her 


132, THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


after magazine had exploded and her decks aft were nearly red-hot. This 
was a sad accident, all the officers except the gunner were killed ; unfortu- 
nately they had gone below to have lunch prior to starting the afternoon 
escort. Commander Williams, a most efficient officer, had been in the 
Patrol during the whole War, and had taken over command of the 
Viking only a short time before. Sub-lieutenants Houth and the Hon. 
Harold C. Tennyson were both promising officers. Plate VII shows 
the extensive damage caused by the mine. 

The Nubian was torpedoed in the raid of October 26th, 1916. The 
torpedo exploded almost under the bridge but most fortunately did not 
kill the occupants, although the personnel in the foremost stokehold and 
on the fo’c’sle suffered severely. 

The Zulu was mined on November 8th, 1916, while on passage from 
Dover to Dunkirk. The mine exploded under the engine-room, throwing 
parts of the turbines on to the fo’c’sle. There was a fair sea on, and 
the motion caused the after part to break off and sink. The fore part was 
towed into Calais by the French T.B.D., Capitaine Mehl, only just in 
time to save it from sinking. Curiously enough, within half a minute of 
the explosion, the Captain was telling one of his officers how the ship’s 
black cat had deserted the day before ! 

The Ghurka was mined off Dungeness on the night of February 8th, 
1917. Practically all hands were lost, for it was blowing the best part 
of a gale of wind. Lieutenant-Commander Woolcombe-Boyce, her Captain, 
had been in the Patrol throughout the War, and was a sad loss to the 
Flotilla. Commander Lewin, my gunnery commander, was spending the 
night on board her, to inspect her night-time gunnery arrangements. 
He was saved, and was instrumental in saving the life of one other man, for 
seat gallant act he received the Stanhope and the Humane Society’s 
medals. 

The Tartar was mined in June 1917. This again was an accident which 
should not have happened, although no blame attached to her officers. 
She was, however, towed into harbour. 

Collisions and other accidents were not infrequent. It had to be so. 
Dover harbour was most difficult in a gale of wind, and at spring tides the 
western entrance was dangerous at about high water, even to a destroyer, 
unless she was very carefully watched. The number of vessels in the har- 
bour was an added difficulty, especially as trawlers were apt to bob round 
corners at most inconvenient times. I never took official notice of any 
accident which was not the result of carelessness, and even then practically 
each Captain was allowed three accidents, unless the carelessness was 
great. ‘To have more than three accidents was too expensive ! 

I wonder if the Captains of the boats realised how heart-breaking 
it was to the Admiral, when perhaps he was gradually collecting a few 
good boats, to have one or more relegated again to the dockyard through 
want of care in their handling. But still, accidents are bound to happen, 
and there was nothing for it but resignation and patience ; for, beyond 
all things, it was necessary to make allowance for youth, long hours of 


‘puey yuris ev Aq ysnosyy peysnio pur 


HA 31Vv1d 


peddus useq pey eYys JF se SEM }[NSeT OL 


CaNIW ONIAd YALAV ONINIA ‘SIWH 


TO 
-co =~ ee, 
——— ee, ee 
~~ —_—— 


IIA 41V1d 


(NALSO LY YADAAO DNIATA HSILINA AO FAVED 


THE INCOMPARABLE SIXTH FLOTILLA 133 


work, and the necessity for everyone gaining experience ; and experience 
in a new class of boat inevitably means either close shaves for the lucky, 
or accidents for the less fortunate. | 

Fog—especially at night—and absence of lights, were all against the 
boats, and not only added to the difficulties of navigation, but to the strain 
on their Captains. The Downs at night was no joyful place to be in under 
weigh, and, as far as possible, I avoided allowing destroyers to move about 
there after dark, except in the fairway; but this could not always be 
arranged. 

On one occasion when I was at sea in a destroyer I saw the file of 
secret memoranda lying on a chart-house table. These, of course, should 
have been locked up. I therefore told my Chief-of-Staff to bring them 
ashore when we landed, and to signal to the Commanding Officer to repair 
to my office with his secret memoranda for correction. The hue and cry 
after the file and the attendant anxiety would, I estimated, be sufficient to 
ensure greater care in the future. So far, this was merely an incident of 
passing interest; but its humour lay in the remark of the Mate, who 
summed up the matter by saying: ‘“‘ Well, I don’t know what the Navy 
is Coming to, when you can’t trust a Vice-Admiral in your chart-house !”’ 

The general work of the Flotilla defies detailed description. In 1916 
the Tribals—few in number as they were, and old—took practically the 
whole of the Belgian coast patrol, and at the same time provided the 
special destroyers which took distinguished persons to and from France. 

The 12-pounder Tribals, in addition, acted as support to the traffic line 
with steam always on the engines, they were turned out at a minute’s 
notice to hunt submarines or to reinforce traffic routes, hard and incessant 
work, 

The “‘ 30-knotters ’’ did escort and patrol duties, acted as guard boats 
to the monitors at night off La Panne, guarded the offing of Dunkirk, 
acted as supports to our drifters, and assisted in the Downs. During the 
winter of 1917 I was careful not to allow them to be out in very bad 
weather, as they were getting too old, and hulls could not last for ever. 
One of them got into a gale that year, had her ventilators washed away, 
and barely managed to make the Downs. These boats occasionally had 
some fun on the Belgian coast, but their duties were, in the main, mere 
hard work which I thoroughly appreciated. 

The torpedo-boats which were too small for open sea work, were used 
entirely in the Downs to protect shipping and back-up the boarding 
flotilla. This was arduous and difficult work owing to the tides, mists, 
and crowded state of the water. 

As regards submarine-hunting, this was indulged in by all vessels. 
The Milne, Commander Victor Campbell, rammed one U boat, recovered 
two survivors, and brought in portions of the vessel on her fore-foot. 
Other submarines were attacked, and, perhaps, accounted for; but I 
never claimed a submarine without the evidence being conclusive. 
The P boats, somewhat later arrivals, were invaluable, and I was able to 
use them on account of their shallow draught in waters which were 


134 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


dangerous to the destroyers owing to mines; their small draught, how- 
ever, did not guarantee them immunity from danger. They kept the sea 
in practically all weathers. 

The destroyers at Dover were the terror of the German submarines, 
and without doubt a submarine rarely showed her periscope in daylight 
in our waters. They either dived through in the day-time, or slipped past 
at night-time. 

In my memory of the Dover Patrol during the War, the Sixth Flotilla— 
the incomparable Sixth Flotilla—is always present, either at sea or going 
out of harbour; I never seem to remember them coming in! Of one 
thing I am certain—no men during the War did better service for the 
country in any part of the globe than the captains, officers, and men of the 
Sixth Destroyer Flotilla. 


THE TRIBALS 


It’s as dark as pitch and Erebus and Hades out to-night, 

With a strong gale from north-eastward, and the wind has got a bite. 
There'll be a big sea running with hard squalls of snow and hail 

But we’ve got to keep the Channel and go out and face the gale. 


Yes, you lately joined-up youngsters, you may think the ‘‘ Old Man ” daft 
To send us out a night like this to be washed down fore-and-aft, 

But the Hun would pass his raiders, just as easy as could be 

If he thought that we at Dover shirked the winter gales at sea. 


We’ve had a pretty rough time, what with lightships all put out, 
With fogs, and tides, and gales of wind, twas hard without a doubt ; : 
But never has a Tribal once the whole time of the War 

Asked leave to run for shelter or “ lie doggo ” near the shore. 


135 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 


Our weakness in the Channel—Offensive strategy—Determination to patrol the 
Belgian coast—The conception of the Barrage—A self-compensating scheme— 
The functions of the parts—The first wall mine-field—Proposals for mine- 
barrage in the Channel and North Sea—The laying of the barrage, 1916— 
Submarine destroyed—Demonstration off the coast—Laying the mine nets 
in 1917—A description of work on the patrol-line. 


T the beginning of 1916 matters in the Channel assumed a serious 
A aspect. I had insufficient destroyers to protect the traffic in the 
Narrows, and more especially the ships at anchor in the Downs, 
which were undergoing examination. If the enemy guessed the meagre- 
ness of our defence, then raids in force would without doubt ensue. At 
one period I had only at my disposal and ready for service one single 
destroyer which mounted 4-inch guns. The old thirty-knot destroyers, 
and those Tribals which mounted only 12-pounder guns, were useless in 
action against the modern German destroyer. Other vessels were available 
for general purposes, but the only single one which was of value against 
destroyer raids was the Attentive light cruiser. It therefore seemed to me 
that the best method of strengthening our defence was by assuming an 
offensive attitude on the Belgian coast, thus shielding our weakness in 
the Channel, by a show of strength off the enemy’s ports. The monitors 
and more lightly armed destroyers would make a fine show in the offing 
of the coast, and thereby act as a screen to the Narrows. Moreover, it was 
highly improbable that the enemy would think that I was mad enough 
to throw all my strength off his coast, fifty miles away from the Narrows, 
while leaving the Channel practically undefended. 

In truth, the defence of the Channel was in no way weakened, since it 
is impossible to weaken what does not exist; but, the institution of the 
patrol enabled me to strengthen our position by using vessels which were 
useless in destroyer raids to make a fine parade off the Belgian coast, and 
to foster in the mind of the enemy an entirely false estimate of our strength. 

The problem of how to maintain a patrol off the submarine and destroyer 
bases of the enemy at Ostend and Zeebrugge appeared at first sight to be 
insoluble. The fate of the Aboukir, Cressy, and Hogue, all three sunk 
within two hours by the same submarine in the open sea, stood out as a 
monumental warning. If such a disaster could happen in the open sea, 
what chance was there for ships close off the enemy’s submarine bases ? 
But this problem, like all others, yielded to concentrated thought; and 


136 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 137 


I arrived at the conclusion that if we ran a net barrage at a distance of 
ten miles from the shore for the whole length of the Belgian coast, that is, 
from the shoals off Dunkirk to the Dutch neutral waters, I could, with 
safety, allow the monitors to patrol the line. 

But could such a line be laid? It was a prodigious undertaking. Ten 
miles of nets! Such a thing had never been suggested before, nor had it 
been conceived that such an undertaking could possibly be achieved in the 
open sea. But I had unlimited confidence in the British deep sea fisher- 
man ; a seaman in the best interpretation of the term; a man whose life 
is spent in gales and heavy seas, who is more at home on the water than on 
the land ; and I knew Captain Bird, who commanded the drifters, to be a 
man of unfailing energy and ability, and one who had the complete 
confidence of all who served under him. I had therefore no doubt that, 
after he had agreed that the operation was feasible, it would be carried 
through with complete success. 

So far as the safety of the vessels on the patrol line was concerned I 
argued the matter in this wise. 

The danger to the monitors lay chiefly in attack by submarines; the 
net barrage would be an efficient protection provided such an attack were 
made from the shore flank of the patrol, and the 12-pounder destroyers 
having one flank only to guard, should be able to ward off submarines on 
the other flank, the one that was open to the North Sea. 

It was, however, also necessary to guard against a sudden daylight attack 
by cruisers. Speaking generally, the shoals to seaward provided a good 
measure of defence, but there was still a considerable area of open water by 
which large ships could approach the patrol line. This had to be rendered 
unsafe. 

It was inadvisable to close this channel by a mine-field which was dan- 
gerous to large vessels. Since in thick weather, when tides were strong and 
accurate navigation difficult, such a field might prove to be a danger to our 
own vessels ; but, more important still, there was always the chance that 
at some future date our own cruisers or transports might be required to 
navigate in those waters. In all work on the coast the future had always 
to be kept in view. It was very easy to take measures which might handi- 
cap, in the future, the free action of our forces. I therefore always tried 
to attain the objects which were, for the moment, important without 
mortgaging the future, and therefore closed this channel with bluff, 
pure, unadulterated bluff. 

Aircraft can observe mines being dropped from mine-layers, but they 
have no means of estimating the depth at which those mines have been 
moored. These helpful facts were made use of by selecting a clear day 
when the enemy’s aircraft were up and about. We then laid a mine-field, 
a beautiful mine-field, but one totally innocuous, as all the mines were 
moored close to the bottom with water deep enough for ships of the 
greatest draught to pass over them. During the laying we intercepted 
wireless messages from the German seaplanes counting the number of 
mines dropped and reporting the position of the mine-fields. But what 


138 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


they could not see, and therefore the German authorities never knew, was 
that the mooring-ropes were quite short ; they therefore charted the mine- 
fields as dangerous to large vessels. In this way was our flank protected. 
The channel was kept open to us, but closed to the enemy by pure bluff. 

The barrage itself was formed of net-carrying mines, with their moor- 
ings, electric batteries, and other adjuncts. It was liable to attack and 
destruction at night, during the absence of the patrol ; for the patrol was 
only a day patrol, and was useless during the hours of darkness. To 
protect the nets I laid two rows of mines at two different depths, close 
inshore of the net line; which, incidentally, was the origin of the Folke- 
stone—Gris-Nez mine barrage. For this was the first occasion when a 
wall of mines had ever been laid. I expanded this mentally into a complete 
wall, and discussed at that date with Sir H. Jackson, the First Sea Lord, 
the advisability of laying such a barrage from Folkestone to Dover across 
the Channel, and also one from Scotland to the neutral waters off the 
Norwegian coast. He agreed to the Channel barrage, but pointed out that 
no mines were at that time available. 

But to return to the Belgian coast barrage. The whole scheme was 
a rather pretty self-compensating arrangement. The mines protected the 
nets, and the nets protected both the mines and also the monitors from 
attack on the shore side. The destroyers protected the monitors from 
submarine attack on the sea side (they had only one direction in which to 
keep a look-out), and the monitors protected the destroyers ; and lastly, 
the monitors were protected by the deep mine-field from attack by heavy 
vessels from the north, and in turn protected these mines from being 
swept up. 

The laying of the barrage was an operation of interest, chiefly from the 
fact that a large variety of classes of vessels were employed, some coming 
from distances outside the patrol. The thirteen and a half miles of nets 
were laid by fishermen who had only recently been introduced to the 
particular materials employed, and to mines and electrical gear generally. 

In the first place, it was necessary to re-survey the passages between the 
shoals off Dunkirk, and to mark with buoys and drifters at anchor those 
passages which were to be used by the mine-layers ; for the Orvietto, the 
largest mine-layer, was a heavy-draught ship. 

During the actual laying operations, the chief danger to our vessels 
appeared to be an attack from mine-laying and torpedo-carrying sub- 
marines, and more particularly from homing submarines carrying tor- 
pedoes. During the first day’s operations, before the complete defence 
could be placed, the whole of the patrol would be open to attack by 
submarines from the northward and westward. Special precautions were, 
therefore, taken and a temporary line of drift-nets were laid to flank the 
western side of the patrol. Also a line of dan-buoys! was moored to the 
northward to deceive aircraft into believing that mines were laid in their 
vicinity. 

1 A dan-buoy is a particularly visible buoy used by fishermen in the North Sea 
to mark the position of their nets. 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST __139 


At four o’clock on the afternoon of April 23rd, 1916, the mine-layers 
Orvietto, Princess Margaret, Biarritz, and Paris, under the command of 
Captain F. S. Litchfield-Speer, left the Thames, escorted by two divisions 
of Harwich destroyers, and proceeded through the Downs to the Dyck 
lightship, up the recently surveyed and buoyed channel and arrived at a 
marked position at the end of the outer Ratel Shoal at 4 a.m. on the 24th 
(see Chart of the Patrol). They then proceeded to near No. 4 buoy 
and laid a double line of mines from this position to two and three- 
quarter miles from the Thornton Ridge, and from there they ran in 
towards the Dutch coast. 

The destroyers Zulu and Nubian ran on the port beam of the mine-layers, 
dropping dan-buoys every three miles and one mile respectively, to mark 
the position in which the light-buoys, which were to mark the patrol line, 
were to be moored and the mine-nets laid. By this means the relative 
position of the mines, mine-nets, and light-buoys were co-ordinated. 

The Trinity House vessels Vestal, Argus, and Alert followed the 
destroyers and laid the light-buoys. Then came the Fifth and Seventh 
Divisions of net-drifters to lay the mine nets, and the mine-laying trawlers 
whose business it was to complete the eastern arm of the mine-field 
in towards the shore, where the water was too shallow for the mine- 
laying ships to navigate in safety. 

The monitors Prince Eugene and General Wolfe acted as supports to 
the igh dis which were detailed to guard the various units at their 
work. 

The procedure of the mine-net drifters was simple. As each division 
arrived at its mark-buoy the rear boats proceeded to shoot their nets ; 
and, after steaming for a definite time interval, each succeeding pair 
stopped and shot their nets to complete the line. 

In addition to the above, the Tenth and Eleventh and Twelfth Divisions 
of net drifters anchored parallel to the West Hinder and shot their nets 
in order to form a protection to the western flank of the patrol line. The 
Ninth Division anchored in extended order on the Raab Shoal, but did 
not shoot their nets, so as to be ready to weigh quickly in case of attack 
as their position was an exposed one. Their presence was intended to 
convey to enemy submarines the impression that nets had been shot in 
this position, thus closing the north end of the area to attack, when of 
course in reality it did nothing of the sort. 

By 7.30 a.m. the mines had been laid and the mine-layers and their 
escort left for Sheerness. Several attacks were made on the vessels by 
aircraft. At 11.30 a.m. Flight Sub-Lieutenant Suir and Sub-Lieutenant 
Furness in a Nieuport Clerget brought down a German seaplane, which 
blew up on striking the water. At 2 p.m. a heavy explosion occurred in 
the mine-field, caused it was hoped by a submarine striking a mine. At 
noon a submarine fouled the nets of the Arndtlly Castle and a depth charge 
was dropped by the yacht Diane. At 12.40 p.m. the Tirpitz battery 
straddled the General Wolfe at 32,000 yards range with four salvoes. At 
2.15 p.m. a submarine, UB 13, fouled the drift nets of the drifter Gleaner 


1440 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


of the Sea and was destroyed by hand bombs, but to make certain she 
was attacked by the Afridi with her explosive sweep. 

When laying the eastern leg of mines the tidal stream was making 
rather more strongly than we had anticipated, with the result that the 
end buoy of our patrol line was laid just inside Dutch territorial waters. 
At 2.30 p.m. two Dutch torpedo-boats arrived to ask our intentions and 
to protest against the violation of their waters. They were given two 
pieces of information: first, that I was sorry that we had strayed into 
their waters, and secondly, that they were in the middle of a very 
dangerous mine-field. This information apparently satisfied them. We 
piloted them clear and they made off and, wisely, did not venture out 
again. | 

At 2.55 p.m. two enemy T.B.D.’s were sighted off Zeebrugge steering 
NE. The Harwich destroyers Medea (Commander Valentine F. Gibbs), 
Melpomene (Lieutenant-Commander Hubert de Burgh), and Murray 
(Lieutenant-Commander H. Taprell-Dorling) engaged them with the 
gallantry always shown by the destroyers under Commodore Tyrwhitt. 
The Milne (Lieutenant Hugh R. Troup) joined them shortly afterwards. 
In the ardour of pursuit, and owing to the fact that I had omitted to warn 
the Harwich boats not to venture near the shore on account of the bat- 
teries, they steamed in to within 16,000 yards from the shore. Here they 
came under fire of the batteries, with the result that the Melpomene was 
hit in the engine-room below water by a shell, which fortunately failed 
to explode. The other boats were also hit. The Milne and the Medea 
proceeded to take the Melpomene in tow. ‘They were observed by the 
German boats, who again came out to attack. The Medea therefore 
slipped and, with the Murray, gave fight ; the monitors came to the rescue 
with some well-directed 12-inch rounds which drove the enemy again 
inshore, and the Melpomene was towed out. It is difficult to assign a 
reason why the shore batteries should have ceased firing; had they con- 
tinued their fire they should have made a good bag of destroyers. The 
whole episode was a piece of fine, cool destroyer work, aid being given to 
one another at the right moment under fire, and a firm front shown at 
the same time to the enemy. ‘This was our first encounter with the 
German destroyers, and it was here that we learned that the greater 
elevation of their guns enabled them to outrange our boats. Also we 
found that individually they mounted more 4-inch guns than did our 
boats. . 

An unfortunate accident occurred to one of our drifters, the Clover 
Bank, She laid her nets correctly, and then, losing sense of direction, 
steamed to the southward instead of the northward and dropped the moor- 
ings of the battery-box among the mines which had just been laid by the 
trawlers. She almost immediately struck a mine and was blown up. 

As two of the Harwich boats were out of action and two others holed 
I saw that more destroyers would be required in order to maintain a 
night patrol, so I turned the patrol line over to Commodore Johnson and 
left for Dover to telephone personally to the First Sea Lord, Sir H. Jackson, 


XI aLlv1g 
*SMOIG 9} UMOP JYFIeI]s [JOT ppnoys Joy) 1%Y} Os Ja}OWIeIp UdAe Ue 07 dn UTaYy Surg 0} poom YILM papfoa asiom suns ayy. 


MYIMN.IG LY (¥IAIVYD TVYANAD AHL WOWA SNNYD HONI-2! DNIGNVI 


. _-— 
: ——— 
—— < 
. > Cat. - 
ie eee —_—— 


* 


THE 12-INCH MARK X GUN MOUNTED AT ADE 


TIRPITZ BATTERY 


NKERKE FIRING AT THE 


Plate X 


~ 
g > 
Digitized by Google 


ie 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 141 


intending to return to the patrol immediately I had done so. On arrival 
I found orders had arrived to withdraw the whole patrol as the enemy’s 
battle fleet were reported to be at sea. This was a bomb-shell, as the 
withdrawal left the enemy free to investigate our net barrage without 
interruption. 

The Ninth Division of drifters which had anchored on the Raab Bank 
failed to receive the order to withdraw and remained there for the night. 
They reported a very heavy explosion at 1 a.m. in the short line of nets 
laid to the NE. of them and a double explosion at 2.45 a.m. The boat 
U 13 which had caused one of these explosions escaped in a damaged 
condition into Zeebrugge. 

So ended April 24th. We had laid in that day a double line of mines 
fifteen miles in length; thirteen and a half miles of mine-nets were 
moored, of which ten miles had been made active; fourteen large light 
buoys and several other marks were laid. We had destroyed one submarine 
and badly damaged another, and one seaplane had been brought down, 
while a protection of eighteen miles of drift nets had been provided to 
the patrol line. Our losses were one officer and seventeen men killed and 
two destroyers temporarily out of action. The French destroyer Obuster 
strayed into our mine-field off the north end of the Cliffe Island Bank 
and got badly damaged. 

Next morning the Ninth Division of drifters found themselves quite alone. 
At 6.15 Commander George W. C. Venn, R.N.R., who was in command, 
weighed and stood to the SW. to join the patrol. Now followed an 
extraordinary occurrence. As these six little drifters were steaming down 
the patrol line they sighted enemy destroyers, which gave chase and 
opened fire on them. One drifter, the Au Fait, was hit and captured, 
but the others continued on their course and arrived safely at Dunkirk. 
A full account of this incident is given later (see page 178). 

Our air reconnaissance carried out the next day reported a force of 
eleven destroyers, three small cruisers, and a seaplane ship off Zeebrugge. 
It was, therefore, desirable to impress the enemy with a false idea of our 
strength ; so, having obtained Admiralty approval for the co-operation of 
the Commodore T. at Harwich, a demonstration was arranged to be held 
on the same day as that on which I had arranged to lay the deep mine- 
field to the NW. of the patrol line. 

On April 28th, 1916, therefore, I met the Cleopatra, flying the pendant 
of Commodore Tyrwhitt, off the outer Ratel Bank. The arrival of the 
mine-layers and their escort was timed so that we should all reach the 
S.W. Hinder Buoy at the same time. With the Harwich force we were 
able to parade a force of two cruisers, two flotilla leaders, thirty-two 
destroyers and four monitors. The northern deep mines were laid, and 
having patrolled within full sight of the enemy’s aircraft up and down the 
patrol line the force broke up. 

During the mine-laying operations a German seaplane counted and 
signalled each mine that was laid, which was exactly what I wanted. It 
was this demonstration of strength off the coast which I am convinced 


142, THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


kept the traffic in the Narrows free from attack for the next eighteen 
months. 

Four destroyers from Harwich were lent by the Admiralty to act as a 
support to the patrol line, so that a daily patrol was established of eight 
destroyers, two monitors, and one destroyer leader or cruiser, and a 
night patrol of two submarines. This was continued till the mine-laying 
and net-laying was completed, after which the patrol was halved and the 
two halves worked on alternate days. 

On May 3rd and 5th further mines were laid as the whole defence as 
shown in the chart of the patrol was completed. 

On May Sth aircraft reported that the nets abreast of Nos. 8 and 9 
buoys were disarranged and a large area of water was covered with oil. 
The Lord Clive also reported streaks of oil extending the length of the 
patrol line, so without doubt one of the enemy’s vessels came to grief. 
On May sth and 6th the enemy attacked the light buoys, and on the night 
of May sth-6th sank Nos. 3, 5, 6 and 16 buoys, and at the same time 
broke several of the glass floats that supported the heads of the nets. 
This made little difference to their efficiency, as after sinking a few feet 
they came to rest and were as dangerous as before to submerged craft. 

On May 7th the whole of the net defence was finally completed. Steps 
were at once taken to provide spar-buoys, which were practically unsink- 
able, in lieu of the light-buoys. The French naval forces under Admiral 
De Marliave rendered valuable assistance throughout these operations. 

After the barrage had been laid all mining in the Channel ceased. 
This we thought was due to the barrage having lengthened the route 
from Zeebrugge for submarines operating in the Channel; but after the 
War it was learned that an order restricting submarine activities against 
merchant vessels had been issued by the German authorities about that 
date, so that mining was restricted on the north side of the Channel. 

From May 1st to October 1oth, 1916, a continuous day patrol was 
kept up, with very few omissions, by the monitors, destroyers, and mine- 
sweepers and other vessels, and constant repairs were carried out to the 
mine-nets. Our submarines carried out the patrol at night-time. This 
involved much hard work for the officers and men of all the ships and 
vessels, but the various duties were most ably carried out. 

While the patrol was in force twelve submarines were attacked on 
different occasions by the destroyers or ships. 

The day patrol was out for 144 out of the 163 days, and our submarines 
were out for 112 nights. Repair work to the nets was carried out on 
58 days to fifty-four miles of nets. 

The patrol was attacked twenty-eight times by aircraft in numbers 
varying from one to fifteen machines. 

On nine occasions the enemy destroyers were attacked by our destroyers 
or monitors. 

On three occasions the patrol was fired on by the Knocke or Tirpitz 
batteries. The Prince Rupert was straddled by the Knocke battery and 
had engine-room lights put out. 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 143 


In the early days of the barrage, whenever the German destroyers 
were reported out I left Dover in a destroyer at full speed for the patrol 
line as it was uncertain what such activity might mean. On the first 
occasion, as we neared the patrol vessels we intercepted signals showing 
that our destroyers were engaged. A “ buzzer ’’! conversation between 
the monitor and the Amazon (Commander Oliphant) was both amusing 
and reassuring, as showing that our boats were quite happy regarding the 
scrap in which they were engaged. 

‘* That last salvo was rather close, was it not ?’’ buzzed the monitor. 

“Yes,” replied the Amazon. “ It took my Sub’s cap off, but luckily 
it was an old one, so it did not matter |’ 

One other tale which caused amusement was told of one of the monitors, 
which had a very livery and none too skilful cook, who rarely put himself 
out to oblige the ship’s company. He instituted a strict rule that no 
dinner would be received in the galley for cooking after 11 a.m. A hopeful 
ordinary seaman one day blew into the galley at five minutes past eleven 
with a lovely sea pie beautifully decorated. 

“Too late,’”’ said the cook. ‘I can’t cook that.’’ Vision of hunger 
and the anger of his messmates sharpened the satire of the youthful 
seaman, who, seeing that he had a clear line of retreat, blurted out : 

“‘ Oh I know you can’t, Cookie, but you might give it its time |” 

The weather towards the middle and end of October was such as to 
preclude the chance of keeping the monitors on the patrol line. The 
danger to these low-powered vessels was considerable. Gales of wind 
from the SW. sprang up without much warning, and on one occasion 
the Prince Rupert was caught, and had to steam with both anchors down 
to prevent drifting stern first up the patrol line. The horse-power of the 
monitors was small and their speed fell rapidly in any sea. Moreover, 
the tides were strong. ‘The nets could not be attended to except in fine 
cara so that there was no help for it but to discontinue the 
patrol. 

On July 25th, 1917, the net barrage was again laid off the Belgian coast. 
The necessary material had been scraped up, thanks to the exertions of 
the Stores Department of the Admiralty, in addition to our heavy demands 
for the cross-Channel barrage. Much the same procedure as in the 
previous year was followed, but the laying had so far improved that the 
twelve miles of nets were laid in one and a half hours, Admiral Ronarch, 
Admiral de Marliave’s successor, was with me in the Broke to witness 
the laying. 

German destroyers came out and fired on the drifters, but the Terror 
and Broke and the Nimrod with her division of destroyers drove them off. 
Our destroyers were, on this occasion, not allowed to chase inside the net- 
line as the enemy would merely have repeated their tactics of the previous 
year and tried to draw them in under the batteries. Moreover, when 
steaming fast the destroyers raised a swell which would have materially 
disturbed the drifters at their laying. It always looked tempting to chase, 


1 Short-distance wireless. 


144 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


but it was a useless and harmful thing to do. The remainder of the nets 
were laid on the 27th and a daily patrol started. 

The nets were laid one mile to the westward of the old net-and-mine 
line so as to be clear of the mines already laid in 1916. The enemy had 
evidently learned a good deal from the previous years, as the attacks on 
the nets by seaplanes were more systematic; several battery cases were 
sunk, which led to our placing the batteries inside mine cases and sinking 
them to the bottom, an effective but, to us, inconvenient procedure. 

As the 12-inch monitors were all up the Thames preparing for the 
Great Landing, the patrol had to be taken by the Erebus, Terror, and Soult, 
with the small monitors and such destroyers as could be spared. 

The bombardments of Ostend from the patrol line have been dealt with 
elsewhere, but the net result was that Ostend was abandoned as a destroyer 
base, and Bruges henceforth became the port of the Belgian coast. As 
Bruges was eight miles inland this must have inconvenienced the enemy 
considerably. Aircraft were very active during the whole of the year. 

The only marked difference on the patrol line in 1917 as compared with 
1916 was the increase in the range of the shore batteries, due to the use 
by the enemy of elongated shell. Another innovation was the introduction 
by him of motor boats electrically controlled from the shore. The intro- 
duction of these craft was typical of the manner in which a new idea was 
given away uselessly by the enemy. The first knowledge we had of the 
existence of these boats was when one of them ran into the pier at Nieu- 
port. The explosion was described by the French as “ acharnant.” It 
did no damage, and sufficient fragments of the machinery were recovered 
to give away the principles of the design. They were twin petrol engined 
vessels partially closed in, and travelling at a very high speed. They 
carried a drum with somewhere between thirty and fifty miles of insulated 
single-core cable, by means of which the boat was directed electrically 
from the shore. The fore part of the boat carried a considerable charge 
of high explosive probably from 300 to 500 Ibs. in weight. 

The method of operating was to start the engine, after which the crew 
left the boat. A seaplane protected by a strong fighter air patrol then 
accompanied the vessel at a distance of three to five miles, and signalled 
to the shore operator the helm to give to the vessel. These signals needed 
only to be “‘ starboard,”’ “‘ port,” or “‘ steady.” The boat zigzagged while 
running. This may have been intentional or unintentional. On being 
steered into a ship the charge was exploded automatically. 

The device was an old one; a boat similarly controlled was used in 
H.M.S. Vernon, the torpedo experimental ship in 1885. The only new 
features in the German boat were petrol engines and W.T. signals, neither 
of which existed in 1885. 

On the first occasion that one of these boats was run at the fleet it was 
sunk by M 24 (Lieutenant-Commander St. John). This initial success 
led to this class of vessel being treated with too much contempt by our 
ships. The second attack on the ships on patrol failed, the boat for some 
reason did not succeed in reaching the patrol vessels. The third attempt 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 145 


on October 28th was successful, the Erebus being struck fair amidships. 
Several casualties resulted—two killed and fifteen wounded—from the 
debris thrown about by the explosion, and Captain Charles S. Wills 
suffered considerable damage to his ears from the concussion. The 
Erebus’ bulge was damaged but the ship did not leak at all. 

During 1917 mine-fields between the latitude 51° 30’ and 51° 40’ N. 
and longitude 3°0’ and 3° 20’ W. were laid by destroyers. 

When a long line had to be laid the problem of protection was not a 
very easy one as there were five destroyers working together all crowded 
with mines and a single high explosive shell might have detonated a boat- 
load. The waters in which the mines were to be laid were those used by 
the enemy, so an escort was necessary to protect the mine-laying des- 
troyers by engaging and leading off the enemy from them. The lines of 
mines ran nearly up to the Dutch territorial waters and ended close to a 
shoal (see the Chart of the Patrol), over which there was sufficient water 
for the destroyers ; but at the same time it was so shallow that steaming 
at a speed of twenty knots would have raised a considerable wash and made 
collisions between the boats working at night during a sixteen-point turn 
not improbable; a high speed of steaming was therefore inadvisable, 
so the speed of laying was retarded. Again, the escort had to form a 
separate column to the laying boats so as to be free at any moment to 
proceed at high speed against the enemy. ‘Turning the two columns 
16 points (180°) in shallow water at night was again to be avoided ; and, 
finally, all chance of the destroyers and their escort mistaking each other 
for enemies, should they part company, had to be guarded against. 

The scheme I devised was that illustrated in the accompanying diagram. 
The escort was stationed on the port side of the mine-layers, and the whole 
force steamed at fifteen knots. As each mine-laying boat in succession 
passed the light-buoy, which marked the end of the patrol line, she noted 
the time; and, from the table supplied to her, knew the number of 
minutes and seconds which should elapse before she began her laying. 
Therefore, at her particular time she was on the alert. The rear boat 
commenced to lay at the proper time as given by her time-table. As she 
was finishing laying she signalled with a shaded lamp to her next ahead, 
who commenced to lay. The rear boat then turned four points to star- 
board and increased to eighteen knots, turning again parallel to the other 
boats after running two cables. This increase of three knots was sufficient 
to allow her to pass the whole of the other mining boats during the laying 
and to be in the position shown in phase 6 at 5 at the moment when the 
leading boat had finished laying at 1. All the boats were then in inverted 
order astern of her. At phase 5, after three boats had finished laying, they 
took over the duty of escort, and the old escort turned fourteen points 
and went back to Dover at eighteen knots. The start thus obtained did 
away with any chance of the mining boats overhauling them and mistaking 
them for enemies. The diagram explains the intermediate steps. As a 
matter of fact the boats did not lay all their mines on a straight course, 
but, as shown in the diagram, laid some while running on the four-point 


146 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


PHASE 2, 

No 3 Funses Lames « 3 nme 62 e200, 
Ar rons Course 4 Panes to Gwatccmn, 
Wecacasce Soxze ve 18 Mote 

No 4 Cosmances w Lav 


No 5 Srocueee Pansares wo ln, 

No 4 Finumerts Lavine ov 7 ems44 sacs | 
Axtens Counss 4 Peorts wm snascany 
lecncases SPECS w 18 Knova, 

No 3 Con@ainccs ve Lav. 


Cesvaovens Mu Lavine Secen (5 rs. 


ole PHASE S$, 
03 4 aw SYCER Papaee wo Live, Nos345 Steer PanAuo ve Line 
NO 3 Freugnes LAYING o: tame 36200. No 2 Frases Lavi o (Sunn 30sec . 
areas Counsa 4 Possts we STARBOARD ATCRSCouRSE 4 Ponts w STARBOARD. 
fecntases Seat ve 18 KuoTs incREASES SPtZo w 18 Knors 
Mo 2 Comazncts ve Lay. No. Commences ve Lay 
Escort Tuas 14 Ponts re Pont Re tunes 


Nos 234 ae 5 Steen Pawuinnr wm Ling, 

No! Finisnes Lavine m (Sum 22 acc. 
Arrears Counse 4 Posrre w STARSON‘D, 
INCREASES SPezo wid Knors 

No 5 Aurens Counse 4 Poors we *s 

PoAt ane Retutns ro BASE . 


ced 

a 

ae ae 
% 


e 
m 
e0eee 
S, 
‘\ 
ae «® a= oo 


6 ne 


ert 
‘ 
’ 
“ 


@, 
% 


co 
~ 


Laying a long line of mines with Destroyers. 


GED Ein GEE GE one GER @ a= eae aw eo om ao owe 
%e 
Ep aban se ap «=e dam ag@ «== 


eo eeeee 
‘“ 
‘“ 


~\ 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 147 


course 80 as to fill the gap which otherwise would have occurred, owing to 
the distance apart of the boats in column. The boats were practised 
first in day-time, and then at night off Dover; the laying was most 
successful. 

And what of the patrol ? A typical summer’s day work was somewhat 
as follows. The mine-sweepers and monitors on patrol assembled north 
of Hill’s Pocket! at 2 a.m. The sweepers, supported by the monitors, 
then swept the passage towards the barrage. The destroyers joined the 
patrol off the Cliffe d’Islande Bank. On approaching the barrage the 
destroyers passed on ahead, hoping to surprise some German craft which 
might be working on the barrage at the break of dawn. Perhaps the 
destroyers would be seen to increase speed and then gun-flashes would 
appear ahead as our destroyers, discovering the enemy, opened fire. The 
monitors would then increase to full speed and go to action stations, 
engaging the enemy in a running fight, and getting in a few shots at long 
range as the enemy made off towards the coast under the protection of the 
large-gun batteries ashore, which barred the further approach of our 
chasing destroyers. 

Things having quieted down the patrol would then proceed along the 
barrage line. Enemy aircraft might appear out of the rising sun and 
attack the squadron with bombs ; but not caring to fly low would probably 
miss badly. Our own aircraft would then chase them off, but would, in 
turn, come under the fire of the efficient anti-aircraft batteries on shore 
and be driven off from the hunt. Our destroyers might subsequently be 
reported to be flying the mine. flag, and be seen to be firing at something 
at short range, they were sinking mines that had broken loose from their 
moorings and were floating on the surface of the water. With the sweepers 
still sweeping ahead the patrol would then proceed along the whole length 
of the barrage, the enemy’s coast-line gradually becoming more distinct 
as day broke, but the growing light revealed no more German craft. ‘The 
most eastern end of the barrage would be reached at midday, and then the 
sweepers, having finished work for the day, would be sent home to coal 
and prepare for the same duty on the morrow. 

Suddenly, perhaps, would come the sound of a gun; a splash would 
be observed near the destroyers, who would be seen to be steering in 
various directions at high speed. The signal, “submarine in sight,” 
is recognised. One of the destroyers has spotted a periscope, fired at it as 
it disappears and the hunt begins. All ships keep moving about at full 
speed, hoping that the enemy will give some sign of his position; but 
nothing more is seen, and soon the patrol is resumed. 

As the afternoon wears on a target is dropped and taken in tow by a 
motor launch, and the monitor varies the monotony by some firing 
practice. 

Aircraft again appear. Are they friend or foe? They appear to be 
attacking and are distinguished as enemies, so fire is opened on them ; 
this does not deter them from the attack, and their bombs fall but never 

1 An anchorage between the shoals to the northward of Dunkirk. 


148. THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


hit, for in order to ensure their own safety, they fly too high to make good 
ractice. 

Our own aeroplane fighters, bored with patrolling and waiting for an 
enemy who will not oblige, come down to the squadron and give a display 
of their flying abilities, skimming over the calm waters like flying-fish, 
banking round the masts and over our decks, making spirals and loops, 
and then off goes the leader followed by the others of the flight, soaring 
up and hunting their leader as a quarry. 

Meanwhile, the destroyers pass up and down the thirty-mile patrol- 
line, and the mother of the family, the monitor, waddles up and down in 
the centre ready to support them. A couple of miles closer to the shore 
two other destroyers keep abreast of the monitor, they are the look-out 
and guard against electric motor boats. 

The afternoon wears on, and then it is noticed that a spotting-balloon 
is rising to the SW. of Ostend. The meaning of this is well known. 
The Tirpitz Battery is about to open fire on the patrol which, in order to 
support the drifters which are repairing the net, has come well within 
his range 

Work is at once stopped and the monitor orders the patrol to form up 
to get out of range, and tells the destroyers to make a smoke-screen. A 
large cloud of brown smoke is seen to appear suddenly from a position 
near to the balloon. Round number one! Tirpitz has opened fire. 
Course 1s at once altered to try and avoid the fall of the shot by dodging. 
Full ninety seconds have to elapse after the flash has been seen before that 
shot falls. What an age that time seems! At last a screech and a splash 
herald its arrival. It falls one hundred yards on our bow, in a place 
where we would have been but for the change in course. The enemy 
are deadly shots; if we remain on a steady course the odds are on being 
hit. By now, however, the whole squadron is smothered with the smoke- 
screen, so that the enemy is foiled in his spotting. Nevertheless he 
continues to fire salvo after salvo in our vicinity and a warm time continues 
for the tortoise-speeded monitor. 

The day draws to a close, and course is shaped for the Roads of Dunkirk. 
The destroyers are sent on to fuel and rest, before their work during the 
ensuing night. Slowly the monitor follows and ‘eventually arrives in the 
Roads at 10 p.m. and anchors. The mail comes on board and the orders 
for the morrow are read: perhaps they are to the effect that this same 
monitor, the same sweepers, and the same T.B.D.’s will assemble at 2 a.m. 
for the patrol. So to bed for four hours’ rest. 

Such was the duty on the patrol line day after day, none knowing what 
would happen next. It was arduous, incessant work, but a happy relief 
from the monotony of escort work in the Channel, and provided good 
training for the officers to whom the memory of their work on the Belgian 
Coast Patrol will remain long after the Great War has almost faded from 
the minds of those who were less actively engaged. 

What was the real value of all this labour ? 

The direct advantages, such as the reduction of German mining and the 


THE BARRAGE OFF THE BELGIAN COAST 149 


increase of our powers of close observation of the coast, have been dealt 
with, but over and above these lay another, not so plainly apparent, but of 
greater importance, namely the protection of the Downs and Channel 
shipping. Our offensive strategy on the Belgian coast hid our weakness 
in ships for the defence of our trade routes. The enemy never divined 
that all our real fighting force in destroyers, namely four of the Tribal 
Class, patrolled daily off his harbours. He never gauged that, what to 
him would have appeared sheer madness, our undertaking the offensive 
on his coast with so absurdly small a force, hid the fact that we had 
nothing except old obsolete destroyers with which to protect the Channel. 
Offence was our surest defence, and by assumption of strength we hid our 
weakness and distracted his attention from undertaking serious operations 
against our overseas commerce—the life-stream of our country in the War. 


THE SONG OF THE BELGIAN COAST PATROL 


See how slowly move our vessels as they pass along your shore, 
Just as if the times were peace times and we were not at war, 
We’re a challenge to your seamen to come boldly to the fray ; 
We form a deadly insult as you watch us day by day, 

With our broadsides to your harbours inside the Hinder Shoal 
Here we flaunt the old White Ensign on the Belgian Coast Patrol. 


You have had no sea traditions by your fathers handed down 
Nor history to emulate or make you seek renown ; 

You know naught of sea honour that the true-born sailor heeds 
Of the laws which rule his actions or regulate his deeds. 

You show no naval chivalry, your “ kultur ” killed your soul 
Or you’d never stand the insult of the Belgian Coast Patrol. 


Come right out and fight, you pirates, you can see the force that’s here. 
There’s nothing to support us, no reinforcement near. 

You've merely to take courage and to try to rush our line, 

You'll bring with you a challenge that our ships will not decline. 

Come and boldly stop the insult, forsake the sheltering mole 

And those batteries that save you. Come and fight the Coast Patrol. 


You will not wage the honest war that olden time has seen, 

But try to win by murder with your pirate submarine. 

You cannot grasp that fighting fair alone the fighter thrills 

That skulking out of gunshot all warlike spirit kills. 

Send round more ships if you’ve too few, we'll gladly meet the whole 
For the glory of Old England and the Belgian Coast Patrol. 


150 


CHAPTER IX 
BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 


The original Folkestone—Gris-Nez barrage—Reasons for its failure—The Good- 
win-—Snou barrage—The mines—Their failure—Length of barrage increased— 
The value of the barrage—The vessels whose loss was caused by the barrage— 
The Folkestone—Gris-Nez barrage—How laid—Methods for forcing sub- 
marines to dive—Lightships versus flares—How defended—The raid on the 
patrol vessels—Faults in defence—The success of the scheme. 


HE barrages which were laid by the Dover Patrol formed a con- 
siderable defence to the traffic. No part of our labours has been 
less understood, and more ill-informed criticism has been 
directed against these obstructions than any other portion of our work. 
Although I knew full well, and had pointed out to the Admiralty, that 
the English Channel could not be closed to submarines except by a 
vertical mine-field, I had no intention of merely sitting down and waiting 
until sufficient mines in large numbers could be supplied. Any method 
that could be devised that promised to obstruct, in any way, submarine 
traffic was well worthy of trial even though it might prove to be only 
partly efficient. The point that critics have failed to appreciate is, that 
any obstruction which was known to the enemy to exist formed to a certain 
degree a deterrent, and was sure to limit his free action. Moreover as 
will be seen, barrages were useful in confining destroyer raids and the 
submarines to certain definite channels; thus the chances in favour of 
our being able to attack the raiders became greater than if they had 
been allowed a free passage throughout the whole breadth of the 
Channel. 

The first barrage which was attempted was one of very elaborate design. 
It originated at the Admiralty and was a bold attempt to solve a very 
difficult problem. The scheme, however, failed for certain practical 
reasons which were, at the time, not easy to foresee. Broadly speaking it 
consisted of a very large number of massive wooden floats moored by 
chains to heavy anchors. The floats were connected together by stout 
wire hawsers from which nets were suspended. The whole was intended to 
form a net barrage across the Channel from Folkestone to Gris-Nez. I 
must confess that at first I was favourably impressed by the scheme, 
which seemed to promise success. But both the Admiralty designers and 
I had forgotten the tremendous wear which was bound to occur when 
iron surfaces ground against each other under a heavy strain ; especially 
when in contact with water containing grit in suspension. The barrage 

151 


152 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


would have been successful had it not been for bad weather and the 
consequent sea which was raised in gales of wind. 

It is one thing to theorise and devise obstructions at a drawing board, 
calculating the statical stresses and designing the material to withstand 
these ; and another to watch that structure in a sea-way with a strong 
tide and heavy sea running. The independent motion of each fraction 
then becomes apparent, the line of white foam, which makes the whole 
length of the barrage a milk-white band, is evidence of the forces at 
work ;_ the fierce blows of the wave crests on the buoys which cause 
them to dip and surge all help to indicate the difference between theoretical 
and practical conditions. But while observing the surface portion rolling 
and tossing, the mind has, in addition, to form some conception of the 
commotion that is going on below. The heavy cables from the mooring 
buoys running down to the moorings alternately tauten and slacken, 
lifting the ground chains from the bottom at one moment as the sea 
strikes and lifts the buoy, and dropping them with a thud as the buoy 
falls into the hollow of a wave. 

This motion is quite different from that of a ship riding to an anchor ; 
then, the long length of chain assumes a uniform catenary from the bow 
to the bottom, causing only a slight lift and tautening as the ship rises, 
or moves a little astern owing to the wind and sea. The motion of each 
link in the other is barely measurable ; the whole length of chain acts as a 
single spring, its weight and catenary gradually checking the ship and 
causing her to forge ahead again in a lull. The only links of the chain 
that suffer, as a rule, are those in the “‘ nip” of the hawse-pipe ; these 
are unduly stressed by the angular bend to which they are there exposed. 
But, even under these more or less favourable conditions, those who have 
ridden at anchor in a sea-way in a gale know full well that the chances of 
parting the cable within twenty-four hours are considerable ; for, as they 
watch the cable tauten almost to a bar, they wonder that any chain can 
be made to hold under such strenuous conditions. 

In the case of a barrage the use of pendants of chain of a length of four 
to six times the depth of water, as would be used in the case in mooring a 
ship, is out of the question. The spring-like action given by a long length 
of chain is, therefore, largely reduced; the motion of certain links is 
much magnified ; the grinding action is accentuated. The only chance of 
such moorings holding in a Channel gale is to ease the wear by reducing 
the strain on the chain as much as possible. But, if, as in the Folkestone 
barrage of 1915, heavy wooden baulks, some twenty in number and weigh- 
ing four tons each, exposing square sides to the tide, are strung between 
mooring-buoys, the pull on the buoy becomes too great, the stress on the 
moorings correspondingly mounts up, and the grinding is increased 
beyond the possibility that any material can resist the consequent abrasion. 
The line-contact between the rounded links becomes a flat surface, this 
flat has its angles chawed off, grit gets deposited between the surfaces, 
and the metal is quickly worn through. Portions of the links of the Folke- 
stone chain that were thus chafed through were extraordinary examples of 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 153 


wear ; rings two and a half inches, and over, in thickness were cut clean 
through after a few weeks’ service. 

Nor was this all. One weak spot meant the breakage of a section. 
Breakage at one place meant increased strain on the remainder, since there 
were less moorings to take the strain; so further breakage occurred. 
When a surface-wire parted a long stream of heavy floats tailed off end-on 
to the tide. When the tide changed this floated back and wound itself 
partially round the buoy, partly over the next section, and then things 
fairly began to hum. The buoy, throttled by this unconventional necklace, 
suffered increased strain, and probably parted its chain. In any case, a 
knotting of baulks and wires went on which almost defied unravelling, 
except by waiting for a fine day and towing the whole mass in under a lee 
sheltered from the wind and tide. 

Commander Eldridge, a very capable and hard-working officer, was 
in charge of the construction of the barrage; but he soon reported that 
progress was impossible, since the breakages occurring in those portions 
which had already been laid balanced the new work which was being laid 
out. A visit to the boom in quite average weather showed to me the 
impossibility of handling such a tangle in a sea and tide-way from a trawler. 
Clearing a block of lumber on a river was not in it with straightening out 
the lifting, swirling mass of hawsers and floats. However, three times 
I urged him to try again, and whole-heartedly he worked ; until, at last, I 
was forced to report to the Admiralty that the whole scheme was impractic- 
able, and that the remnants of the boom were becoming a real danger to 
navigation by strewing the waters of the Channel with vagrant floats 
and mooring-buoys, some of which fetched up off the coast of Essex and 
some off Ostend. 

Admiral Sir H. Jackson, then First Sea Lord, having fully satisfied 
himself as to the impossibility of achieving success, approved the abandon- 
ment of the scheme. This decision was of interest as he had, in his earlier 
days, been afforded considerable experience of the difficulties of maintain- 
ing, at Spithead, an anti-destroyer boom of far less ambitious dimensions, 
and in a far more sheltered position than the Folkestone barrage ; he there- 
fore knew thoroughly the practical troubles inherent in maintaining 
obstructions moored in a sea-way. 

The next barrage across the Channel was one I laid in the autumn of 
1916 from the Goodwins to the Ruytingen shoal, which, the following spring, 
was lengthened to the Snou Bank, a short distance from Dunkirk. This 
was merely a six-inch wire hawser, with light nets hanging from it, sup- 
ported by a number of ordinary mooring-buoys. The nets were made of 
light steel wire, and were held by clips to the hawser and to each other. 
Each net held two electric contact mines. The principle of action was 
simple. When a submarine fouled a net the clips broke, the net enveloped 
the submarine and travelled on with it, the mines then came in contact 
with the hull of the boat and exploded. It was necessary that the clips 
should be weak enough to break away before the net was pierced; yet 
they had to stand the very considerable strain of the pressure of the tide 


154 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


on the net. This pressure was so great that a net only sixty feet in depth 
could be used; when deeper nets were tried the clips invariably broke 
under the action of the tide. 

I attempted to compensate for the shortness of the net by filling in the 
gaps below the nets with a mine barrage, but at a sufficient distance off to 
enable the nets to be worked with safety ; this, as will be seen later, was 
not a success. 

It must be appreciated that the maintenance of such a net-barrage meant 
absolutely incessant work on the part of the crews of the drifters; new 
sections were always in course of preparation to replace old ones; and 
every day, summer and winter, when the sea and tide rendered work 
possible, old sections were taken in and new ones laid out. This was, in 
fact, a wall of nets, moorings, and batteries in length equal to the distance 
between Windsor and London, or one-third of the way from London to 
Brighton. These local illustrations may suggest the magnitude of the 
task. 

It will be seen that the fundamental difference between this and the 
old Folkestone barrage was the reduction in stress on the moorings of 
the buoys by using lighter nets, and the reduction of surface area of the 
whole obstruction to the tide and sea by the omission of the wooden floats. 

Troubles of a grave nature were, however, encountered. In the first 
place, the buoys dragged their moorings in south-westerly gales with a 
strong east-going tide. This was overcome by using larger chains for the 
anchors and larger pendants to the buoys; but, at times, the task seemed 
almost hopeless, nothing but the cheery energy of Captain Bird and the 
dogged pluck of the drifter crews enabled the barrage to be maintained. 
Chafe of the chains in the trunk of the buoys gave trouble. This was got 
over by fitting filling-pieces into the trunk to steady the chain, and so 
prevent friction. The clips broke, the electric circuits chafed and made 
earth, the battery-boxes leaked, in fact, every item gave trouble; but, by 
steady plodding, the whole was rendered fairly efficient. 

Of course, such a huge stretch of nets was never efficient throughout its 
whole length, especially after several days of bad weather ; but this did not 
matter. ‘The enemy never knew which position was, and which was not 
efficient ; whatever deterrent effect it had on their operations was the 
same whether the whole, or, at times, only certain sections were in working 
order. 

As soon as the line of nets was completed as far as the Ruytingen buoy, 
laying the line of mines was commenced by trawlers, the mine-layer Wahine 
filling in the gap between the bottom of the nets and the bottom of the 
sea. These mines were laid half a mile to the westward of the nets. 
Shortly afterwards serious troubles arose owing to the mines dragging 
their sinkers and fouling the nets while the latter were being hauled. One 
serious accident occurred to a drifter. On another occasion a mine was 
hauled in the nets, fortunately without accident. There was no help for 
it, all the mine barrage had to be removed. The nets had to be taken in, 
the anchors had to be weighed, and the whole of the mines swept up. In 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 155 


weighing the anchors the Alert, Trinity House tender, was sunk by a mine, 
and eleven valuable lives were lost. 

Here it is well to remark that the whole of the anchor work had been 
done up to that time by the vessels lent by the Elder Brethren of ‘Trinity 
House, to whom the Patrol owe a deep debt of gratitude. The Admiralty 
had no vessels to spare; but for the assistance of that body, both in this 
respect and in the provision of buoys and chains, the work could not have 
been done. The loss of the Alert was a great blow, not only on account 
of the increased difficulty of doing our work, but because of her previous 
great services. Always ready to help, always at work, she became one of 
the features of the Patrol. I deeply regret that few of her crew were saved ; 
the men unfortunately having just gone to dinner when the mine exploded 
under her bow. This on the top of all our troubles, was most dishearten- 
ings but, in the Patrol, the greater the setback, the more the sterling 
qualities of the officers and men shone out. Trinity House lent another 
vessel, although it was some time before she could be completed and sent, 
and then the work of re-laying the nets proceeded once more. Eventually 
it was completed, and the line was again, more or less, in an efficient 
condition. 

No mines were then laid to the eastward or westward of the barrage, 
thus a gap was left for submarines to pass under the nets. In this respect 
it is interesting to note that the tide in this part of the Channel sets more 
strongly to the eastward than to the westward; but it could not be 
assumed that the mines would not drag westward ; so no new mines were 
laid until sinkers which could not drag had been devised ; a matter which 
was at once taken in hand by the mining school. The reason for laying the 
mines originally to the westward was that they were more protected against 
being tampered with by the enemy, as they were on the Channel side of 
the net-line. Although it was rather an off-chance that the enemy would 
have the pluck to interfere, still, there was the chance ; and, had the mines 
not been dragged, this would have been the correct position. 

The problem of defending the barrage when laid was not an easy one. 
It constituted a grave danger at night to the patrolling destroyers ; and 
as it was at night that the chief attacks on it were likely to be attempted 
patrolling was necessary; so to guide the patrolling vessels light-buoys 
were laid at every three miles to light its position. It may be argued that 
these light-buoys aided the enemy’s submarines. In fact, Captain Gayer, 
the German post-War authority on the submarines, states: “In the course 
of time these beacons became the most trusted friends of the submarine 
flotilla; they were all numbered, and were of the greatest navigational 
aid in the passage of the Straits of Dover.” ‘This at first sight seems a 
most damning criticism ; but let us look at the other side of the matter. 
The German boats had always the navigational aid afforded by the North 
Foreland, the South Foreland, and the South Goodwin Lights on the 
English side ; and the Gris-Nez and other lights on the French side of the 
Narrows. Three of these lights were visible right across the Channel, 
and therefore for the whole length of the barrage. In ordinary weather, 


156 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


therefore, the lights on the barrage could only have been an auxiliary aid, 
a convenience rather than an important assistance ; but, from my point 
of view, the light-buoys helped to confine the submarines and, more 
especially the enemy’s destroyers, to certain definite channels. 

I hoped at first to catch the enemy submarines by keeping one of our 
submarines moored to one of the buoys which usually was lighted ; 
on such occasions the submarines carried the light, and that on the buoy 
was extinguished. Twice our submarine so placed sighted an enemy boat 
passing nearby, but our old boats, unfortunately, had only bow torpedo- 
tubes ; so, before she could slip and bring that tube to bear, the enemy 
had escaped. I asked the Admiralty to lend me a submarine with broad- 
side tubes, but none could be spared. So this method of attack failed. 

Again, it was impossible to waylay submarines and destroyers at night 
if they used the whole width of the Channel; but, naturally, the larger 
German submarines and destroyers did not wish to pass over the barrage 
if such a passage could be avoided ; so, as I had anticipated, they came 
chiefly to use the Channel between the western light-buoy and the Good- 
win Sands. This enabled me, when at last I was lent E 52, a modern sub- 
marine, for three weeks only, to place her at night on the North Sea side 
of this buoy, and thus bagged UC 63. Again, the use of this channel 
caused two submarines, on the same night in an abnormal tide and fog, to 
ground on the Goodwins. One was caught and destroyed,! the other 
lightened herself and got off.? Further, I laid a small deep mine-field of old- 
pattern mines at the Dover end of this channel; but, unfortunately, the 
old pattern mines were useless against submarines, so there was no catch. 

The barrage again caused destroyers generally, in their lightning raids, 
to pass round the ends of the obstruction. I divined that this was the case, 
so on April 2oth-21st, 1917, I placed the flotilla leaders Broke and Swift ona 
patrol which covered the Dover entrance to the Downs, and also the pas- 
sage between the end buoy and the Goodwins. This led to the destruction 
of two German destroyers, and to the destroyer raids being abandoned. 
The above results were sufficient to justify the institution of the barrage 
and its lighting, but it had a still further value. The mystery which 
surrounded the barrage, and the want of accurate information regarding 
its potentialities, caused it to act as a deterrent to the use of the Narrows 
of the English Channel by cruising submarines right up to September 
1917. To quote again from Captain Gayer : 


“Since April 1915, the route through the English Channel had been 
abandoned by all but a few North Sea boats. The Flanders Flotilla 
(chiefly mining submarines) had considerable experience in passing the 
Straits and were constantly able to overcome the renewed difficulties 
which were made by the enemy in the Channel, so on the renewed opening 
(unrestricted sinking of merchant vessels) fifty per cent of the time this 
route was utilised in the passage to the west coast of England. Great 
success was obtained in this manner by individual boats, particularly U 85 

2U 48. * U 94. 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 157 


and U 53. On the other hand, the boats encountered considerable diffi- 
culty in the passage of the Channel, and owing to weather and other 
unfavourable conditions held the northern route round Scotland. As 
the conditions for the northern route improved in March, the Commander 
of the North Sea Flotilla ordered the route to the North of England for 
all large North Sea boats.”’ 

“ From September 1917 onwards the new commander decided to return 
to the Dover route. On September 28th U 70 was caught by the stern in a 
mine-net, but was able to be brought into Zeebrugge. In November 
U 48 and U 94 were set on the Goodwins.” 


_ This is not a bad record considering that until the new mines were 
supplied we had no effective material to impede the passage of submarines, 
and had to rely solely on our brains, bluff, and indirect methods, and the 
hard work of the vessels of the Patrol. The barrage as an obstruction was 
largely inefficient ; but, since an unknown yet suspected danger invariably 
acts as a deterrent to free action, the fear of the barrage fulfilled a duty 
which itself it was incapable of carrying out. Moreover, by enticing the 
submarines and destroyers into certain definite routes, it caused losses 
to the enemy which otherwise would not have been sustained. The 
barrage was designed in desperation and was maintained, in spite of gales 
of wind and bitterly cruel and cold weather, by the wholehearted labour of 
the drifters. It succeeded as well as could be expected and was ridiculed 
afterwards. Mr. Churchill and other critics have scoffed at it, and con- 
demned its construction as useless and its virtues as illusory. So much for 
the vision of post-War critics. They would, presumably, have pre- 
ferred that, instead of sinking two destroyers and two submarines, and 
limiting the free use of the Straits to destroyers and submarines, I should 
have sat still and done nothing. 

The next barrage we laid was the vertical mine-field from Folkestone to 
Gris-Nez. When I laid the barrage off the Belgian coast in 1916, a work 
which has already been described, a wall, formed by two lines of mines 
moored at different depths, was included as an integral part of this system. 
This vertical wall was a defence which, so far as I know, had never before 
been suggested, but it proved to be the only method of using mines in a 
manner which will insure the sinking of submarines. At that time 
I suggested to the First Sea Lord that barrages on this principle should 
be laid across the Channel and also across the North Sea. He pointed 
out that, for the moment, no mines were available. But agreed to the pro- 
jects as soon as a sufficient number had been manufactured. Needless to 
say, objections were raised to the proposal in other quarters ; but common 
sense gained the day. 

It is necessary in laying mines to lay them at some fixed minimum 
distance apart, on account of the effect that the explosion of one mine 
has on the one next to it. This distance varies with the nature of the mine, 
and its sensitiveness to the effect of the neighbouring explosion. It can 
easily be understood that if mines are laid too close together, and one 


158 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


explodes, a feu de jote of mines will be the result, each one causing the one 
next to it to detonate, and so on in succession until the whole field is des- 
troyed. Such an incident occurred, I believe, in the Heligoland Bight 
early in the War. Now supposing this safe distance to be a hundred and 
fifty feet, and that the diameter of a submarine to be twenty feet, the only 
method of placing mines so that a submarine must hit a mine at a given 
depth is to have seven lines of mines all at the same depth, each with its 
‘mines a hundred and fifty feet apart. Each line is “‘ staggered,” so that, 
looking at the seven lines from a distance, a mine would be seen at approx- 
imately every twenty feet. But this only holds good for one depth. If, 
as in the Straits of Dover, the mean depth is eighteen fathoms, or a hundred 
and eight feet, five such groups of lines of mines would be required, 
one twenty feet from the bottom, another forty, and so on, to form a solid 
wall. From this rough description it will be seen that five sets of seven 
lines or thirty-five lines would be required. As the Straits of Dover are 
approximately eighteen miles across, an arithmetical calculation will show 
that this meant about 26,000 or 28,000 mines. But so great a number was 
not necessary in practice, since it was certain that if boats were sunk one in 
every six passages, 1.e. In every three complete journeys, they would soon 
give up passing through. ‘Two lines only at each depth were at first pro- 
posed, but it was hoped to increase this to four lines. Five depths were 
selected, so that about 4000 mines were required. This I calculated gave 
a six to one chance in favour of the submarine; or approximately that 
pean out of every three that made the double passage would 
e sunk. 

After discussing the various pros and cons with Sir John Jellicoe and 
Sir Henry Oliver in February 1917, the Folkestone—Gris-Nez line was 
chosen for the mine-field, and the scheme approved as soon as mines could 
be supplied. In time the Operations Committee, a new committee that 
had lately been created under the egis of Sir Eric Geddes, started to get 
busy, and suggested an alternative scheme for mining from Dungeness 
to the French coast with a line of patrolling vessels to force submarines to 
dive | This was an absurd scheme from the practical point of view. The 
length of line chosen was needlessly and at the same time hopelessly long, 
in fact, thirty per cent longer than the place I had chosen. 

In September I heard that the mines would be ready in November, so 
I then commenced working out the details of the scheme. At the sugges- 
tion of Sir H. Oliver the portion of the Channel in which we were going to 
lay mines was re-surveyed, and the water re-sounded, to make certain that 
no changes had occurred since the previous survey. The first operation 
was to lay four parallel lines from the NE. Varne to the traffic route off 
Gris-Nez. It was quite a nice problem to lay these lines out of sight of 
land, and as it turned out on a misty day, since there were only sufficient 
vessels to lay two lines simultaneously, and the second two lines had to 
be laid on the return journey in a cross-tide, after that the lines already 
laid had become dangerous. It is true that they were deep and well 
below the ships, but it would have been unwise to run any risk of a mine 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 


dropping on one already laid. The orders 
governing the laying were therefore made 
out in great detail, and every precaution was 
taken to ensure the greatest accuracy in 
positioning each line. 

Laying went on until the whole of the 
lines were laid, and the work was practically 
completed by the end of December. The 
accompanying plan gives a diagrammatic 
section of the mine-field. 

In this diagram the horizontal scale is in 
miles and the vertical scale in feet, so as to 
make it compact. The lines of mines, of 
course, are not all as shown in the same 
vertical plan, but separate at certain definite 
distances in the direction of the paper, but 
the general effect is that of a vertical wall of 
mines. 

The question of how to make the mine- 
field dangerous to surface craft occupied 
much thought. Originally I had had hopes 
of surface-nets, but our experience of the 
mixture of nets and mines in the Goodwin- 
Snou barrage had not been happy. The 
best policy, to begin with, was to let sub- 
marines sink themselves in the mine-field 
while diving ; but, soon after installing, the 
question of a more extensive patrol of the 
mine-field would be certain to arise. The 
use of searchlights would then be a necessity, 
and would also be of value in indicating to 
the patrol the position of the mines.* 

This necessitated the searchlights being 
operated from fixed positions. If permanent 
structures were used the depth of water and 
a strong tide necessitated their being of a 
very elaborate design. 

Ordinary ships could not be moored or lie 
at buoys in all weathers, but lightships already 
did so. So why not use lightships ? Four 
such ships, with a light at Gris-Nez and at 
Folkestone Pier, could illuminate an area 
across the whole Channel. I therefore put 

1 The statement on page 180 of the Official 
History of the War, ‘“‘ Naval Operations,” Vol. 


V, that I strongly deprecated the use of light- 
ships is utterly untrue. 


< 
* 
a 


Rrds : 


: 
7 


er ar Pi > ee 
AE? ay “ * 
s33¢4 asin? cs 
B@ iy 


ah et 
Sore a 


= + 

ieaee CPT 
Le rh 
ss So 5 ae 


— == 
* Ay 
UF uat Pe 
- Ot We gt ee 
re ey aa od > 
CRG oe ee LP ae 
o° A et 
Pr, oa Os es rt 
“A soe o~s Sees ae oS 
oo La Se sss An * 5 
us Ges e ae con + Sanat ee 
- REISS Od dese Dy reg ee D od etn, <A Rn 
— Pe le ey ee ns > & ne, 
G PRR es, [= teh fhe.F nee) Se : 
Py = ~~) aT. 4 $4 _ a y 
“a e< omit he A he, 4 
?-.* + he 
FT ee 
So vo 
ee 


Mets seen Mma —— 
Act Mines 


ANCHORED TH 


NEZ 


Ri} 


ree FOLKESTONE 


1IAGRAM or 


D 


J 


<p. Sn = 

~ bh . - 

-,: « M ~ a 
5 


Sis 2 Se 
are. 


160 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


forward a proposal for four such vessels, each to have four searchlights 
working, two sweeping and two fixed direction beams. The fixed lights 
to be approximately on each beam and the two wandering lights to sweep 
one approximately from north to east and the other approximately from 
east to south. 

Another great advantage of using moored vessels was that it gave 
an actual line across the Channel, to the eastward of which no patrol or 
other vessels would be allowed to pass. This enabled a mine-field to be 
laid immediately to the eastward of the line of light-vessels, which would be 
dangerous to submarines on the surface. 

In ending a letter to the Admiralty, which gave full details of the methods 
I proposed to use of protecting the mine-field and causing submarines to 
dive, I wrote: 


*‘'The general scheme therefore is : 

(1) Extend the present deep mine-field from the French to the English 
coast. 

(z) Lay a double line of mines eight feet below low water ordinary 
springs from one mile SE. of Folkestone Gate to two miles NW. of Gris- 
Nez, flanking the NE. limits of the deep mine-field. 

(3) Provide three searchlights each at Folkestone and Gris-Nez, one 
being a fixed beam and two wandering beams. 

(4) Provide three shallow draught small vessels with bulges and 
moor them on the principle of lightships to divide the distance across the 
Channel, each to have four searchlights, and two 12-pounders or 4-inch 
guns and two 8-inch howitzers (short range). 'The searchlights will be 
used as follows: each ship will throw two fixed beams one NE. and one 
SW. to meet those of the next ship. The other two searchlights will 
sweep the NE. and SW. segments. 

*‘ These sweeping beams should show up and follow any enemy boats 
for the patrol boats to hunt and force under water. The searchlights 
should show up to the patrol boats all submarines which are on the surface 
up to a distance of three miles from the source of light. The 12-pounders 
or 4-inch guns are for the protection of the lightships in day-time. The 
8-inch howitzers with time-fuse H.E. shells are for protection from bomb- 
ing at night. These ships should have bulges, it is always of importance 
to frustrate a first attack on the part of the enemy ; a first success means re- 
peated attempts, while a frustrated attack will not probably be persevered in. 

“Four lightships, if available, would be better than three. 

“The patrol vessels will vary their patrol to keep clear of the shallow 
mines at low water. 

* They should, however, be able to pass over them at all tides except in a 
sea. +B 


About this time the Dover Barrage Committee was appointed by the 
First Lord of the Admiralty. It was, of course, highly desirable to bring 
all the expert engineering skill available to bear on the possibility of build- 
ing a permanent obstruction across the Channel, so an engineering com- 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 161 


mittee would have been most valuable. But to attempt to run a mine 
barrage from the Admiralty with Naval officers who knew nothing about 
the practical work at Dover and the general details from Nieuport to the 
Downs, was, of course, absurd. It was again an example of how little 
the value of experience was recognised by some men at the Admiralty at 
that period. The inexperienced rarely appreciate the value of experience. 

The constitution of the Barrage Committee was peculiar. The chairman 
was Rear-Admiral Roger Keyes, who had had experience of war with 
the Turks, but no knowledge of war against the Belgian Coast German 
Command, one surveying officer, one post-captain, the Superintending 
Captain of Mine-Laying, an eminent civil engineer, and one other member. 

The Barrage Committee visited Dover and saw everything we had done, 
and then returned to the Admiralty merely to become a fifth wheel to 
what was an intricate and very technical coach; they issued a report 
which was not helpful. The most illuminating suggestion was contained 
in the last paragraph of that document. It read: 


** That in order to secure the success of any barrage scheme across the 
Channel, the construction, maintenance, defence, and patrol of the same 
should be under the control of one officer who should be solely and directly 
responsible to the Admiralty for all matters relating thereto. 

‘‘ They consider that any other course will lead to failure.” 


In other words, the Committee of amateurs, so far as conditions of 
war in the Channel were concerned, was to be given sole charge of the 
central slice of the Dover Command, and was to use the vessels of the 
Dover Command as it wished without any reference to the Admiral who 
was responsible for the protection of traffic, raids, co-operation with the 
Army, etc. Was there ever a more impossible suggestion made by any 
committee | 

However much the Committee, or the more active members, may have 
wished to gain a footing in the Dover, Command they should have couched 
their demands in more reasonable terms; for, of course, the proposal 
was one which no naval officer of experience could endorse, and naturally 
it was turned down by the First Sea Lord. When Admiral Keyes became 
my successor needless to say nothing more was heard of the Barrage 

mmittee assuming executive functions in the Dover area. 

Infinite harm, however, had been done by the appointment of a com- 
mittee itching after command and control. Questions which previously 
had been settled between the Sea Lord concerned and myself now went 
to the Barrage Committee. Take for example the moorings of the light- 
ships. I was anxious to get these at an early date. On December 12th 
I telegraphed for details asking when they would be supplied and was 
told that the Barrage Committee had them in hand. In the old days a 
visit to the Varne Lightship and an inspection of her cables, an expert 
opinion from Trinity House, a visit to the Director of Stores at the 
Admiralty and the Fourth Sea Lord, would have settled the matter. 
Two days’ work only. When I left at the end of December the Barrage 


L 


162 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Committee were still apparently considering a matter which I could have 
settled and had in place before December rst. Further, since all letters 
and papers relating to the barrage on arrival at the Admiralty went to 
this committee, it was within their power to block or help my proposals 
as they wished. It was a hopeless situation. Had this committee never 
been appointed the lightships would have been in place, the Straits 
efficiently blocked, and the destruction of submarines at night commenced 
by the middle of January. As a matter of fact no submarine was destroyed 
at night in the barrage during the whole of January 1918; the first so 
sunk after I had left the command was UB 38 on February 8th; but 
more of this anon. 

The itch for control caused this committee to try a second class of inter- 
ference, for they attempted to dictate the arrangements of the patrols 
in the Straits. As its members had neither local knowledge nor respon- 
sibility, Sir John Jellicoe, with good sense bred of his great experience, 
refused to countenance such an absurdity; but in spite of this minor 
interferences crept in. On December 15th, in answer to certain corre- 
spondence, I wrote as follows : 


“*I am again increasing the patrol drifters, at all events temporarily 
by one division. 

“‘ The Folkestone Gate trawlers look out for the waters inshore of the 
gate, and the French supply two trawlers for the water close to Gris-Nez. 

‘“‘ This leaves me two divisions for the Goodwins nets, which are most 
important for defending the Downs, and one division for Dunkirk. 

‘“‘ During the day-time I have now one division of drifters which I am 
increasing to two divisions patrolling the mine-field, and, when weather 
permits, a constant airship patrol covering two miles each side of the 
mine-field. 

“ Alterations of this nature in a patrol must be gradual to avoid con- 
fusion and accident. 

““It may seem simple to effect them, but it is not. Advantages and 
disadvantages have to be weighed, and ideas occur in development. 

“* It is as well in war time to avoid making mistakes, and the dispositions 
of a patrol of this nature in close proximity to the enemy are complex. 

“For instance, the question of the Dunkirk drifters is closely linked 
with the defence of the P boats and 30-knotters and the Zeebrugge 
destroyers. 

‘So long as I can keep the nets and mine-fields off the Belgian coast 
efficient the German destroyers must pass close to West Capelle, and a 
force at anchor off Dunkirk is a potent threat to their return route. 

“If, however, the nets are allowed to get into disrepair, as now is fast 
becoming the case owing to a failure of supply of net mines, then the enemy 
can return anywhere between the Cliff d’Islande and West Capelle ; his 
return course cannot be localised and the force at Dunkirk is useless. 

“* A force at Dover is useless to prevent a raid unless kept under weigh. 


1 The nets protecting the northern entrance to the Downs. 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 163 


“It is impossible to get a force out of Dover at night and across the 
Straits to stop raiders, or in time to engage the enemy before he clears 
out, if the first warning given is the attack on the mine line. 

“‘T cannot keep more than a certain percentage of my destroyers under 
weigh night after night as the captains cannot stand the strain of too much 
night and day work. 

“* A force at anchor at Dunkirk not only rests the boats but is a bigger 
deterrent to a raid on the Straits than a similar force at Dover. 

“‘I have gone into this explanation of a single detail to point out that 
I have reasons for all my dispositions, which may not on the face of them 
be apparent. I know the wishes of their Lordships, and it is needless to 
say I will carry out these wishes wholeheartedly and at the same time 
provide as best I can for the safety of the Straits ; but I must have latitude 
in my dispositions, and I must vary them as necessary; and I submit 
that, having expressed their wishes, their Lordships should leave the 
executive dispositions of forces to me and to vary them as I consider 
necessary.” 


Just fancy an Admiral in command in war time having to write in this 
strain to the Admiralty to answer the meddlings of an irresponsible 
committee ! 

There is an old and very true saying that “ a committee has neither a 
body to be kicked nor a soul to be damned.” In other words, a committee 
can force action upon others, but escape all blame in case of failure. 

It was such foolery ! There was I with a possible destroyer raid at 
my door, the Downs to protect, the French coast to keep from molesta- 
tion; and there, at the Admiralty, was an irresponsible committee, with 
power over my requirements and supplies, trying to get orders given to 
me as to how I should dispose my patrols to suit their theories. Thank 
goodness we had a First Sea Lord who was a seaman of experience ; but 
I imagine, from events that happened shortly afterwards, that his work 
was not made easy for him. 

Critics, who had no knowledge of the fundamental principles of war 
in the Channel, have seized on my intention not to commence an extensive 
patrol of the barrage for one month after the first lines had been laid, and 
without understanding its object, and have submitted it to adverse com- 
ment. Let me therefore explain at length the object of this particular 
restriction and also the reasons for the system of lighting and the patrol 
of the barrage which I proposed to institute, which, unfortunately, were 
not adopted by my successor and the members of the Barrage Committee, 
of which he was chairman. 

I had reason to believe that enemy submarines, mainly submerged, 
passed through the Channel in winter in the day-time. These vessels 
would probably cruise at as low a surface trim as the weather permitted, 
diving on sighting any sort of patrol vessel. This contention has been 
proved to be correct since only four submarines out of the thirteen 
destroyed by the barrage were sunk at night. I believed that immediately 


164 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


the mine barrage became lighted homing submarines would suspect that 
some obstruction existed, and that, on reporting the fact, the German 
authorities would in all probability restrict day traffic and warn all sub- 
marines to exercise great care when in the vicinity of the Folkestone— 
Gris-Nez line. After a month they would probably have diagnosed the 
barrage. It was then well worth while holding up the lighting of the 
barrage until the lightships were in place and everything ready for 
the illumination, and, meanwhile, making an attempt to catch one or more 
of these day boats, which, suspecting nothing, would dive immediately 
they had sighted a single drifter in the vicinity of the barrage. A few 
patrol vessels only near the barrage would create no suspicion but would 
cause the submarines to submerge. There was also still the chance that 
a homing submarine might, at night, tumble up against a patrol vessel in 
the vicinity of the barrage and dive into the mine-field. 

As a matter of fact no submarine was sunk for a month after the barrage 
had been lighted, except the one which was sunk during my period of 
command, before the barrage had been completed, and before lighting 
had given away the secret of the barrage. Had my scheme been adopted 
there was a considerable chance that we might have bagged one or more 
daylight submarines during that month. 

To further this project, for a month before the first mines were laid I 
put P boats patrolling at likely spots for submarines to pass near where 
the barrage would eventually be placed, so that submarines might see 
them and get accustomed to diving to avoid being attacked. They would 
naturally report the fact on their return to Zeebrugge, and it would 
become a recognised procedure for boats to be prepared to dive when 
approaching the spot where it was certain that these patrol boats would 
be met with, and near which, so far, no mines had been laid. Cunning 
and foresight were assets in dealing with an enemy so shy as the German 
authorities at Zeebrugge. 

The same patrol vessels would still occupy the same places after the 
mines had been laid, and a bag of submarines in the day-time would have 
been more or less assured. On the other hand, suspicion would most 
certainly be raised on the very first occasion that the mine-field was 
illuminated ; and on the fact being reported the locality would be certain to 
be treated thenceforth with suspicion. This surely was pure common sense. 

The Barrage Committee, however, had no experience of the local con- 
ditions and thought otherwise. They had the ear of the Admiralty, and 
I was ordered to light the barrage with useless flares and inadequate 
searchlight arrangements. The whole scheme was given away, and 
except on the night of the first illumination, before knowledge of the 
barrage had been received at Zeebrugge, no further submarine was lost 
at night until February 8th, although probably during this interval some 
forty submarines passed either by day or by night past the barrage line. 

To recapitulate ; my scheme therefore in essence was : 

(1) To provide a wall of mines from twenty feet below low water 
springs to near the bottom. 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 165 


(2) To use lightships provided with searchlights to light up any sub- 
marine approaching on the surface, and to keep the defending patrols 
behind this line and not lighted up by this illumination. 

(3) To lay a shallow mine-field as a protection from destroyer raids, 
to be, at the same time, a danger to destroyers and submarines navigating 
on the surface. 

(4) To keep the barrage unlighted for one month after laying. 


As regards (2), the method subsequently adopted of using flares unfor- 
tunately lit up the patrol as well as the water adjacent to it. It went 
back, in simile, to the use of the old-fashioned iron door-knocker, an 
archaic means of attracting attention in the basement before the use of 
the house-bell. In order to attract attention efficiently it is well to make 
the noise at the place where the person whose attention is required 
happens to be, not where he is not. Similarly with illumination, it is 
desirable to light up the object for which search is being made, and not 
the vessels which are searching. 

This is exactly what the searchlights would have done for vessels both 
outward and homeward bound. A far more continuous and stronger 
light would have been provided, submarines would have been lighted up 
when two or three miles away, and the patrol vessels would have been 
in the best possible positions for observing submarines approaching from 
either the eastward or westward. Moreover, with alternative projectors 
the western waters could have been lighted for alternative periods. 

A second great advantage was that any submarine which might try to 
creep through on the surface would naturally try to do so where the 
illumination was least, that is half-way between the lightships. Here 
the patrols would have been concentrated and a far better observation 
maintained than when spread evenly over the whole width of the Channel, 
which was a necessary disposition when flares were used. 

I had learnt this principle of confining the enemy to certain channels 
from experience gained with the Goodwin-Snou barrage. 

A third advantage was that no destroyer force could approach without 
being seen some distance away ; time would then have been afforded for 
the alarm to be given to our own defending destroyers. 

Eventually the flares were found to be of small use and powerful search- 
lights were installed ashore: one at Folkestone, one at Gris-Nez, and 
destroyers with efficient searchlights used on the barrage line; but 
these alone could not be so efficient, throughout the whole breadth of the 
Channel, as the system I had devised of lighting the long twenty miles in 
sections by means of powerful lightships. 

The results of departing from my scheme were deplorable. In Decem- 
ber, before the lines were completed and the scheme was suspected, one 
submarine was destroyed ; but only one submarine was destroyed by the 
mines in each of the months of January, February, and March, two were 
destroyed in April,? May, June, and August accounted only for one 


2 One other was destroyed by a depth charge dropped by a destroyer. 
* U 79 is too doubtful to be included. 


166 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


each.! I have little doubt that had the barrage been left unlighted for a 
month, and had the searchlights meanwhile been properly installed, a 
far bigger bag would have been made. 

The shallow mine-field would have been a great protection to the 
Patrol. Experience had shown me that bluff was one of the most efficient 
methods of strengthening a weak defence. The deep mine-fields I laid 
off the Belgian coast (mentioned on page 137) showed me how easy it 
was to deceive the enemy and limit his activities. If a shallow mine-field 
had been laid, even with the old pattern mines, and if a good percentage 
of dummy mines had been allowed to show on the surface at half tide, 
any attack on the part of destroyers would have been prevented, and sub- 
marines would have dived without the aid of the patrol. 

The mines would have shown up in the photographs taken by the 
enemy’s aircraft. Submarines would also have seen them, and they would 
have been duly reported to headquarters. But such recondite ideas, 
culled from experience, could hardly be expected to impress a committee 
unschooled in the practical waging of the novel class of warfare with which 
we had to deal. 

And what was the result ? Undue haste ruined a great scheme. The 
flares lit up the patrol line. There was, and could be, no adequate floating 
defence of a line of practically unarmed patrol vessels twenty miles long. 
What I had predicted took place. The patrol was raided by destroyers 
and a massacre of the drifters resulted, eight vessels were sunk and eighty- 
nine casualties incurred. The experience gained by the raid of 1916 was 
wasted, the adequate precautions I proposed were neglected, with dire 
results. Mr. Winston Churchill in his articles on submarine warfare 
published in the Daily Telegraph in December 1931, while acknowledging 
the force of my warning, apologises for this untoward occurrence. Gloss- 
ing over the facts by the use of flamboyant and bombastic terms, he 
wrote: ‘“‘ The acceptance of this hideous liability was the essence of 
Keyes’ conception.” It would have been more true and less libellous to 
Admiral Keyes, a gallant and humane officer, had he said that “the 
hideous liability ” was due to inexperience and disregard of my experienced 
warnings. The massacre was needless and should never have been allowed 
to take place. The submarine traffic would have been stopped without 
doubt in a shorter time, and no losses to the patrol would have been 
sarin if my proposals for the regulation of the barrage line had been 
adopted. 

ae following is a list of the submarines destroyed by the barrage or its 
patrol : 


UB 56 12.17 Mined Barrage Night 
U 109 1.18 Gun-fire and mine Barrage Day 
UB 35 1.18 Depth Charge Day 
UB 38 2.18 Mined Barrage Night 
UB 58 3.18 Mined Barrage Night 


1 UB 108 cannot be identified as having been lost in the barrage. 


BARRAGES IN THE ENGLISH CHANNEL 167 


UB 33:=C*=#w 4.18 Mined Barrage Day 
UB 55 4.18 Mined Barrage Day 
UB 31 5.18 Mined Barrage Day 
UC 78 5.18 Mined or d.c. Barrage Day 
UC 64 6.18 Mined Barrage Day 
UC 77 7.18 Depth Charge Barrage Day 
UB 109 8.18 Mined Barrage Night 
UB 103 9.18 Mined or bombed Barrage Day 


The fact that submarines were passing through the Channel was the 
lever used by certain influences at the Admiralty to oust me from the 
Dover Command and to appoint my successor. My differences of opinion 
with the Barrage Committee, due to my accumulated experience, were 
used to further the idea that I was obstructive and impossible to work 
with ; yet, in every case, results proved that my contentions were correct 
and the Committee wrong, which was not to be wondered at as I had had 
nearly three years’ local experience and they had none. 

My assumption that the day passage of boats should be first operated 
against before illumination gave away the secret that some defence existed, 
was amply proved to be correct, as eventually nine submarines were sunk 
in daylight and only four during the dark hours. 

My insistence that flares were useless and that lightships should be imme- 
diately installed and searchlights placed at Gris-Nez and Folkestone, a 
matter that was never properly carried out, was also proved to be right, 
for in six months only four were sunk at night owing to the amateur 
arrangements of lighting that were adopted. 

I warned the Admiralty that the proposed patrol arrangements would 
lead to the barrage being raided and vessels sunk, and pointed out how 
this could be avoided. My warnings were scoffed at and disregarded, 
so that, alas, my prediction cametrue. Eight of our vessels were needlessly 
sunk and eighty-nine casualties resulted. 

Let us hope that the experience gained by this experiment will ever 
prevent the Admiralty allowing Committees to interfere with the work 
of an Admiral afloat. 

I could have supplied a good deal of the above information to the 
Editor of the Official History of the War had I been consulted about 
happenings during my period of command, which for some obscure reason 
I was not. 

The account of the barrage operations in the English Channel during 
that period could then have been commented on by him with a greater 
degree of accuracy. The Official title of the book demanded scrupulous 
accuracy in fact and comment, otherwise the British Public and the world 
at large might be led to wrong conclusions on important matters. No 
avenues of possible information should have been left neglected and 
unexplored. 


THE DOVER STRAITS ROULETTE 


See ! hidden in the muddy tide twixt Folkestone and Gris-Nez, 
Mines in their thousands floating bar the underwater way. 
Blood red the mines are painted, and the water black as jet, 
Both rouge et notre assembled for the Dover Straits’ roulette. 


“* Messieurs, faites vos jeux,” black death, the croupier cried 

To every German submarine that dived beneath the tide. 
“Come! rouge et notre the hazard, your life or death the bet, 
In fateful submerged gamble with the Dover Straits’ roulette.” 


Ah! Passe ou manque which is it ? as they near and nearer creep, 
While visions of their lifetime pass like fleeting dreams in sleep. 
The gibes of murdered crews, prevent all strivings to forget, 

That those deaths may be their death in the Dover Straits’ roulette. 


“* Rien ne va plus” the mines are close, “‘ Messteurs le jeu est fait,” 

The croupier grasps his scythe to reap whatever stakes he may. 

Weird tension grips their beating hearts, and holds their jaws hard set 

‘* Rouge gagne? Rouge perd?”’ Hell’s gates loom through the Dover Straits’ 
roulctte. 


168 


CHAPTER X 
THE DRIFTERS 


Drifters—Their organisation—Nets—Method of submarine hunting—Mine- 
nets—The drifters at Zeebrugge—At Ostend—Other work with the monitors— 
Loss of the Sanda—Loss of the Artes—The Belgian coast barrage—The 
adventures of the Ninth Division—Loss of the Au Fatt—The cross-Channel 
barrage from the Goodwins to Dunkirk—The raid of October 26—27th, 1916— 
Gallant behaviour of the drifters—Aircraft attack—Drifters and the Gris-Nez— 
Folkestone barrage—The first submarine caught there—Tribute to the drifters. 


HE North Sea Drifter is a gallant little craft with a mast, a 

funnel, a large hold, and a steam capstan; the last a most 

important item in hauling in the nets. Formerly this was done 
by hand, but of late years the owners have added this most necessary 
auxiliary ; and, to pay for the expense, the capstan is credited with a 
small share of each catch, the master, the crew, and the owner sharing 
the remainder of the takings. 

It would be difficult to imagine craft less suitable for fighting. ‘They 
had no weapons of offence or defence except one single rifle—they were 
slow and could not escape by showing a clean pair of heels—but they were 
of great value to t::e Dover Patrol both in working nets and also as unarmed 
videttes. Before giving an account of this work it is necessary to give 
some details of their equipment, so that terms which will subsequently 
be used, such as “‘ drift-nets,” etc., may be understood. 

The vessels of the Dover Drifter Patrol formed an organisation apart 
from those used to protect the shipping off Ramsgate and in the Downs. 
The first of the former vessels arrived at Dover on January 4th, 1915, and 
were under the able command of Captain Humphrey Bowring; after- 
wards, when this officer became my Chief of the Staff, he was succeeded 
by Captain F. Bird, an ideal officer for the work, since he possessed great 
ability and was always cheery. By June 1915 the patrol had reached its 
maximum strength of a hundred and thirty-two drifters and three yachts, 
manned by upwards of fifteen hundred officers and men, disciplined, and 
ready for any work, of whom less than a dozen had belonged to the Royal 
Navy six months before. 

The elementary idea of submarine hunting was that a submarine 
should be caught in a net in much the same way that a rabbit is bolted 
into a purse-net and then despatched, the torpedo-boat destroyer 
taking place of the keeper in the final act. Unfortunately experience 
showed how primitive this idea was, and a hundred and one difficulties 


169 


170 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


unforeseen, but discovered in netting such big game as submarines, 
necessitated a very wide departure from the original ideas. So that, from 
the arrival of the first net at Dover until the conclusion of the Patrol’s 
operations on the signing of the Armistice, the development of methods 
and material was unceasing. 

The nets were made of thin galvanised steel wire, the size of the mesh 
being from ten to twelve feet. Each net was a hundred yards wide and 
the pattern varied in depth from thirty to a hundred and twenty feet, 
according to the situation in which it was to be used and the depth of 
water that it was necessary to protect. The cost of each net was from 
£8 to {16 according to the size; the normal equipment of each drifter 
consisted of ten nets, making a “ fleet”’ a thousand yards in length. 
Light as these nets were they were extremely strong ; but they were not, 
of course, capable of arresting a submarine having a dead weight of any- 
thing from three hundred to three thousand tons. Consequently a method 
had to be devised whereby the nets could be drifted as desired and 
envelope an enmeshed submarine without being torn. When a submarine 
had been trapped it was necessary that the position of the net should be 
indicated in some way on the surface, as it was being dragged through the 
water by the submarine, until a suitable opportunity presented itself to 
destroy the catch. These apparently simple conditions opened up a mass 
of problems, some of which were never satisfactorily overcome, whilst 
others were so successfully tackled that the methods employed fell little 
short of perfection. 

The first problem was to float the nets. Originally this was effected 
by the employment of a vegetable substance called ‘‘ Kapok ” ; a product 
of the West Indies, which has been made familiar to the public by its 
use in various life-saving appliances. It was found, however, that kapok 
would not remain efficient for a sufficient length of time. 

After persevering for many weeks and losing many hundreds of nets 
kapok was abandoned and other means of flotation were tried, such as 
corks, sealed tins, etc., and, finally, a solution of the difficulty was found 
by the employment of hollow glass balls. These proved excellent. The 
glass balls were inserted in net-bags made of coarse twine; the bags 
were then secured to the head of the net and stood a surprising amount of 
hard usage. A net one hundred yards long and thirty feet deep required 
about a hundred and fifty glass balls to float it effectively. Difficulty, 
however, was experienced in obtaining an adequate supply of these glass 
balls, as, owing to the low state of the British glass trade and the many 
other calls on that industry, these floats had to be secured at high cost from 
Norway. Later on ample supplies were obtained in England; but, in 
the early days, deficiencies of supply frequently held up the work of the 
Patrol. 

The most difficult problem of all, and one which was never successfully 
overcome, was to find a buoy, or float, which could be attached to the net, 
and which would indicate its whereabouts when the net was taken away 
by a submarine, however‘deeply she might dive. Designs by the dozen 


THE DRIFTERS 171 


and suggestions by the hundred were received, tried, and abandoned, and 
it must be acknowledged that to the end this problem baffled all efforts 
at complete solution. 

Such were the appliances that the drifters, day after day and night after 
night, used in the Channel; shooting their nets on a line between the 
Goodwins and the Ruytingen when the tide was running to the westward, 
and drifting down slowly with it till abreast of Folkestone and Gris-Nez. 
Then the nets were hauled on board, re-shot on the east-going tide, and 
the whole were drifted back again. Occasionally a net would be fouled, 
bringing every destroyer to the spot to hunt for the float which indicated 
its position and to drop charges to destroy the suspected submarine. These 
alarms were frequent, and were generally the result of agents other than 
submarines; but even so they were causes for excitement in what, 
otherwise, was a prosaic method of passing month after month. 

Many minor improvements were made to the gear; but, without 
doubt, the most successful adjunct to the nets was the “ net mine” 
invented by Admiral of the Fleet Sir A. K. Wilson, V.C. This electrically- 
fired mine proved of immense value, and completely revolutionised the 
method of employing the nets. 

A mine, when laid in the ordinary way, that is moored to the bottom 
of the sea by a rope, only guards a space equal to its own dimensions : 
about three feet by three feet ; and a vessel can pass within a fraction of 
an inch above or below, or to either side of it, with perfect safety. The 
use of a mine whose area was extended to that occupied by a net, and which 
was fired automatically, increased the value of the mine immensely ; for, 
when a net enveloped the submarine the mine was brought, with more or 
less certainty, into contact with her hull, with consequent destruction or 
serious damage to the vessel. The only disadvantages were, first, that the 
mine was equally dangerous to our own craft, if, from some cause beyond 
their control, they got into a dangerous area and fouled the nets, and 
secondly that electric firing was necessary, with the troubles which always 
occur when batteries and electric circuits are used below water. On the 
appearance of the net mine the system hitherto followed, of employing 
drifters attached to a “ fleet ’’ of mine-nets which drifted with the tide, 
was abandoned, and a system of mooring the nets to the bottom was 
instituted and became almost universal. The successes were many, but 
it was often impossible to tell with certainty whether or not a submarine 
had been destroyed ; for the mines were frequently fouled and fired by 
whales, thrasher-sharks, and other large fish, besides being struck by 
drifting wreckage, etc. However conclusive evidence of success was 
more than once obtained by the sudden appearance on the surface of a 
dead German sailor, caught amongst the remains of a net which was 
being hauled in for repair or overhaul. 

In the summer of 1915 our progress in long-range firing had been 
sufficient to make the bombardment of Ostend and Zeebrugge possible, 
and preparations were pushed on to commence active work, The recep- 
tion we would receive off these ports was, of course, a matter of 


172 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


surmise ; but it was wise to assume that it would be much the same as 
that with which we would favour any German ships which might have 
attempted to bombard Dover. Submarine attack appeared to be the most 
deadly peril, hence every care was necessary to protect the bombarding 
fleet from these pests. I determined, therefore, to take drifters to shoot 
nets round the vessels while bombarding. It was not the most comfortable 
of all solutions, as I had to traverse the North Sea, at night, with eighty such 
vessels not accustomed to sail in company and quite incapable of defending 
themselves; so that a determined destroyer attack would have been a 
serious matter, possibly developing intoa disaster. However, after weighing 
carefully the pros and cons, and having the greatest belief in doing that 
which the enemy would consider to be improbable, I determined to take 
sixty drifters with me. I instructed Captain Bird accordingly ; and he, 
with his usual energy, trained his vessels to sail in company, to work in 
formations and to shoot their nets to form a zareba with reasonable accuracy. 

To get all the drifters’ “ fleets” of 600 yards of nets with explosive 
mines in them, shot in a correct position as regards each other with no 
overlaps and no gaps for submarines to pass through, was by no means an 
easy job, particularly for fishermen practically untrained in such an 
operation. It was, therefore, necessary to have several practices, Every- 
thing was carefully worked out by compass courses in degrees, and by 
seconds of time, and a considerable period was spent with blackboard and 
chalk instructing the skippers concerned in exactly what they had to do. 
The operation was practised four or five times at sea under the direction 
of the Captain and Commander of the Drifter Patrol. It was most 
important that no information as to what was intended should reach the 
enemy ; and, since when a large number of people were concerned it was 
impossible to prevent talking, everything was worked out and practised 
on the assumption that it was intended to use the system to wall in an 
enemy submarine should one be discovered in the Channel. 

The first start with the fleet was made on August 21st, 1915, but the 
vessels carrying the observation tripods, knocked about so badly owing to 
the sea that was running, that the attempt had to be given up. The next 
night, however, a second start was made; and, the next morning, the 
nets were shot off Zeebrugge. 

On September 6th a similar number of drifters assisted at the bom- 
bardment of Ostend, where they had their first experience of being under 
heavy gun-fire; they were also liberally bombed. It must have been a 
queer baptism for them. They were suddenly withdrawn from one of 
the most peaceful of avocations, and then thrown into the hurly-burly of a 
bombardment, shells screeching overhead and bursting on the water, 
bombs falling unpleasantly close, and all the time those fishermen were 
tied up to their nets, which they would have to “‘ board ’’ when they were 
ordered to, and which it was almost a point of honour not to abandon in 
retreat. There they lay with never a weapon except a rifle with which to 
retaliate. It must have been a trying experience, but they said they 
enjoyed it. 


THE DRIFTERS 173 


At the same time that Ostend was bombarded drifters were helping to 
protect the Redoubtable, which was engaged in firing at Westende from West 
Deep. Here the Violet II attached to the tripods did well, under a heavy 
6-inch gun-fire, in saving the instruments and towing and capsizing the 
tripod to prevent the enemy subsequently examining it. For some weeks 
afterwards drifters were continually being used to protect the ships during 
the bombardments of Westende and Middlekirke. 

On September 23rd, when H.M. the King inspected the Dover Patrol, 
the drifters of the Patrol were anchored in three long lines off the dockyard 
wall, the crews being paraded ashore for His Majesty’s inspection. ‘The 
drifter Clover Bank, with her nets and all gear complete for shooting, was 
moored alongside the wall for the King’s inspection. The King went on 
board her and inspected the gear, and went down to the after cabin with 
the he a making himself thoroughly acquainted with the life and work 
on board. 

The next operation in which the Drifter Patrol was engaged was a 
double one, the Patrol leaving Dover on September 24th, 1916, in two 
sections ; one to accompany the monitors Prince Eugene and General 
Craufurd to bombard Zeebrugge, and the other to accompany the remain- 
ing monitors to bombard Ostend. The first section consisting of the first 
division under Lieutenant Godfrey, R.N., in the Ma Freen, and the second 
division under Lieutenant Crafter, R.N.R., in the Herring Searcher, 
with the yacht Sanda, Lieutenant-Commander Gartside-Tipping, R.N., 
= whole force was under Commander Venn, R.N.R., in the drifter 

osmos, 

When about two miles off the eastern entrance of Dover harbour the 
drifter Great Heart struck a mine and sank with the loss of Skipper William 
Davidson and seven hands killed, two also being injured. The drifters 
Shipmates and Begonia returned to harbour with the survivors, thus reduc- 
ing Commander Venn’s mine-net boats from twenty-two to nineteen. 

On September 2sth at 6.50 a.m., the mine-net boats shot the nets off 
Zeebrugge in accordance with their orders, the monitors shelling various 
targets and gradually closing to the south-westward. At 9 a.m. the enemy 
opened fire on the monitors from heavy batteries. All previous firing 
appeared to have been from lighter guns, the shell from which had fallen 
very short. At 9.15 a.m. the yacht Sanda was struck by a heavy shell, 
probably 8-inch, near the deck-house below the bridge. The ship was 
very much damaged and commenced to sink at once. All the executive 
officers were killed, and out of the total of twenty-six on board only thirteen 
were saved ; some of these were rescued by means of her own boat, and 
some by the assistance of the drifter Fearless, Skipper James Beck, who 
at once slipped his nets and proceeded alongside the Sanda, taking three 
men off her quarter-deck, picked up her boats with six men, and rescued 
from the water four others. 

After the Sanda was sunk the monitors withdrew to the north-west 
and again opened fire, the drifters remaining in their previous positions. 
At 10.20 the drifters were ordered to board their nets and re-form, and the 


174 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


squadron proceeded to the westward. Whilst boarding her nets the drifter 
Hyacinth, Skipper Lawrence Scarlett, which was the next boat to the 
Fearless, was shelled by what appeared to be 6-inch projectiles, fifteen 
rounds being fired at her ; these straddled her so closely that they threw 
water on board her. Notwithstanding this, the skipper and his crew stuck 
to their work, boarding all their nets and mines before leaving, for which 
gallant conduct Skipper Lawrence Scarlett afterward sreceived the D.S.C., 
and his mate, T. J. Prior, the D.S.M. This was the first occasion on which 
the Germans scored a hit on a vessel of the Patrol, and the behaviour 
of the drifters Fearless and Hyacinth was in every way in accordance with 
the best traditions of the sea service. 

On the same day the second division of drifters, under Lieutenant- 
Commander Boothby in the James Fletcher, the third division of drifters 
under Sub-Lieutenant Watson, R.N.R., in the Devon County, and the 
fourth division under Sub-Lieutenant Conby, R.N.R., in the Reward, 
with the drifters East Briton, Sub-Lieutenant Evans, and S.D.T., Sub- 
Lieutenant Tanner (the whole force being under Captain Bird in the 
James Fletcher), \eft Dover for Dunkirk and West Deep. 

At 7.35 the monitors opened fire, firing 102 rounds 12-inch and 17 
rounds 15-inch at Westende batteries. At 1.20 p.m. the force returned and 
anchored in Dunkirk roads, where the detached monitors and drifters 
rejoined. 

At 4.30 a.m. on September 26th the drifters again proceeded into West 
Deep with the monitors taking station ahead, as before, to patrol and guard 
them. At 12.19 the Sir John Moore and Prince Eugene opened fire and 
fired 48 rounds. At 1.25 p.m. on the following day the drifters weighed 
and proceeded into West Deep as before with the monitors. At 3.50 
operations ceased and they commenced to retire. At 4.6 the enemy opened 
fire on the retreating monitors, firing over the rear drifters, which then 
proceeded to retire north-west. The enemy fired nine rounds and then 
ceased firing, the monitors being out of range. 

At 8.45 a.m. on October 2nd, the third and fourth division of drifters, 
with the James Fletcher, weighed and proceeded with the monitors to West 
Deep and took station ahead as before. At 11.50 the monitors opened fire. 
A large hostile biplane attacked the Marshal Ney with heavy bombs. At 
5.10 the firing ceased, and at 6.45 the boats anchored off Dunkirk. 

At 9g p.m. on October 2nd the Drifter Patrol weighed and proceeded 
in company with the monitors through Dunkirk Roads, Zuidcoote Pass, 
and over the Smal Bank, anchoring off Zeebrugge at 6 a.m., where they 
formed a square round the monitors, which shelled various shore targets, 
firing fifty rounds; the enemy made no reply. At 6.40 the drifters 
re-formed and in company with the monitors returned to Dover. 

Such were the little outings of the drifters off the Belgian coast. They 
were, by now, getting hardened warriors. 

On October 31st I regret to say we lost the patrol yacht Aries. This 
yacht was on patrol in the vicinity of the South Goodwin lightship. 
She saw the S.S. Toward of the Clyde Shipping Company blown up and 


THE DRIFTERS 175 


proceeded to her assistance with three divisions of drifters who were off 
patrol. Lieutenant-Commander Caulder in charge of the Artes ordered 
the trawlers to take the survivors of the Toward to Dover, and told the 
three divisions of drifters to return to harbour ; then, observing what he 
believed to be an enemy mine inshore, he steamed towards it to destroy 
it. In doing so he must have bumped another mine somewhere under 
the bridge, which caused the vessel to break in two and sink in about a 
minute. ‘The commanding officer, four officers, and seventeen men were 
drowned ; one officer and four men were saved, two of the latter having 
broken ribs. 

One of the greatest difficulties when dealing with these gallant fisher- 
folk was to impress thoroughly on them the foolishness of taking their 
vessels to the assistance of a ship that had been mined, since one mine 
invariably meant several others near by. My orders were to send their 
boats to the rescue of the crews but never to approach with their vessel till 
the tide had drifted the mined ship well clear of the spot where she had 
been mined. The fellowship of the sea, however, often led to gallant, but 
unwise, actions. Of course, from the Admiral’s point of view, no captain 
has the right, out of mere gallantry, to risk his vessel unduly. He may 
risk himself; that is his own look-out; but his vessel is a valuable asset 
to the country, and its safety should be ensured against mere impulse. 
But it is useless talking about such things. You can inveigh about the loss 
to the country and admonish ; but, at the same time, it is impossible for 
any sea officer, at the bottom of his heart, to condemn such deeds. 

Early in January 1916 we had to lament the loss of the drifter Persistive, 
sunk by a mine explosion, She was drifting with her mine-nets when they 
became foul of some obstruction. After disconnecting her battery, she 
commenced to haul her nets; but, after hauling one net, an explosion. 
occurred, destroying the ship with the loss of Skipper John Martin Rodwell 
and six hands; four men were saved, one of whom was injured. 

At the end of March 1916 the Drifter Patrol commenced to prepare 
for its share of the new scheme to annoy the enemy and restrict his opera- 
tions on the Belgian ports. This scheme, as already described, consisted 
of building a combined wall of nets and mines, from the outer Ratel Bank 
off Nieuport, right up to Dutch waters off the entrance to the Scheldt. 
The laying of the mine-nets was the Drifter Patrol’s share in this operation. 
Each drifter was to shoot a length of 1000 yards of nets, which were 
secured by two anchors and chains to the bottom, and floated to the surface 
by steel floats and glass bottles, the batteries for the mines being carried 
on empty Russian mine-cases. The nets were entirely fitted by the drifter 
crews, who worked both by day and night until moorings, batteries, and 
all other gear were stowed in the boats in an incredibly short time. 

I will omit the details of the net laying. It is only necessary for the 
general reader to grasp the fact that the drifters were spread out, inviting 
attack, in pairs over a length of about twenty miles, and were only twelve 
miles from the enemy’s coast. The support afforded by the two monitors 
and the destroyers on the horizon must have appeared to them of very 


176 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


little actual use. But they set steadily to work and laid their nets as com- 
posedly as if the enemy’s ports of Ostend and Zeebrugge had been a 
hundred miles away. 

There were, in addition, two detached divisions of drifters, one well 
away to the north-east on the Raabs, and one to the westward near the 
south-west Hinder Buoy. More of these anon, but the support they 
received from the larger vessels was apparently of the most shadowy 
description. Of course, I really had the destroyer force disposed so that 
it could jump at once to any point that was threatened, and the monitors 
could waddle (waddle exactly describes their method of progression) 
after them to assist in case they were outnumbered. But the drifters 
could not appreciate these dispositions. All they saw was a few fellow- 
drifters dotted about, the Belgian coast on one beam and some destroyer 
smoke on the other. 

At 3.15 an accident happened to the drifter Clover Bank, the end vessel 
of the patrol nearest to the Dutch coast ; it resulted in her loss and that of 
Skipper A. Strouger ; seventeen men were killed and one was wounded. 
She had dropped her first battery and run her line of nets correctly ; 
then, instead of turning outwards to the north to lay her second battery, 
she apparently lost her sense of direction, turned south, ran 500 yards of 
cable out directly towards the British line of mines previously laid by 
trawlers. Just after hoisting out her small boat to connect up the second 
battery she struck a mine aft, killing her whole crew and six hands from the 
drifter Alaburn, who were working on board her. M.L. 16 and the drifters 
Alaburn and Mary Cowie sent their small boats to save life but only 
succeeded in rescuing one deck hand of the Alaburn who was injured, 
and brought on board the East Briton, a drifter which was carrying a 
surgeon. 

About noon the drifter Arndilly Castle, Skipper Souter, reported that 
a submarine had fouled her first two nets, taking them away from the 
foot wires, and towing them across the tide about 400 yards; the officer 
of the division, Lieutenant D. T. S. Watson, R.N.R., in the drifter 
Chrysanthemum, who hastened to her assistance, found the nets still 
towing slowly across the tide in a south-easterly direction, the end of one 
net being kept afloat by the pellets in the first net. He threw two lance 
bombs at her estimated position which failed to explode, and signalled 
to the yacht Diane, which also hastened to her support. The Diane 
dropped two lance bombs, then her depth charge over the position marked 
by the nets. A heavy explosion took place followed by a large eruption of 
bubbles and oil. The air bubbles became much reduced later on, but 
oil continued to come to the surface, and when the yacht Diane returned 
through this position at 5.25 p.m. she passed through pools of oil. The 
vessels concerned received the usual reward. 

At 2.15 the drifter Gleaner of the Sea, Skipper Hurren, when at anchor 
with his indicator nets out astern, sighted a periscope close to his bow. The 
submarine fouled the drifter’s cable, and could plainly be seen foul of her 
wire. The crew called the skipper, getting the lance bombs ready as he 


THE DRIFTERS 177 


came forward. The skipper rushed forward, seized a lance bomb and 
threw it on to the foredeck of the submarine, where it exploded, throwing 
water over the drifter. The submarine appeared to sink bodily down 
the wire, straight to the bottom. The skipper went full speed ahead, 
firing the signal for a submarine and tried to foul the submarine with his 
nets ; a large pool of oil appearing astern of him as he passed ahead. The 
skipper then marked the position with a buoy. On arrival of the trawler 
E.E.S. the officer of the division, Lieutenant Harland, dropped three more 
lance bombs, only one of which exploded, the depth being nineteen 
fathoms. Large quantities of oil and bubbles were still coming up in 
clearly marked line, and at 3.55 the destroyer Afrid: arrived at the position. 
Oil and bubbles were still coming up in clearly marked line, and at 4.44 
the Afredi passed exactly over the spot and fired her sweep. For this 
successful attack Skipper Hurren received the D.S.C., and his crew the 
usual reward. 

Lieutenant J. G. Muir, R.N.R., in the drifter Cosmos, of the detached 
division by Raabs Bank, which had not been withdrawn, reported that in 
the early morning of April 25th the noise of a propeller was heard, and 
twenty minutes later an explosion took place about the position of Lieu- 
tenant Crafter’s nets. This report was confirmed by Commander G. C. 
Venn, R.N.R., who was anchored in the drifter fohn Robert within half a 
mile of Lieutenant Crafter’s nets, who reported being wakened at 1 a.m. 
by a wery heavy explosion which shook his ship violently. 

So ended the drifters’ spring Bank Holiday. Some of the incidents have 
been alluded to before, but they are hardly out of place here again in order 
to give an adequate account of that day’s experience of our drifter-folk, 
so different from that of any previous Bank Holiday they had spent at 
Grimsby, Yarmouth, Stornoway, or elsewhere. They had laid thirteen 
and a half miles of moored mine-nets, eleven of which were known to be 
active ; one mile had not been joined up owing to the destroyer action 
(see page 140) and the Clover Bank accident. They had been well bombed 
during the morning, and had had the satisfaction of seeing one of the 
enemy’s machines destroyed by our own airmen. The only regret was 
the loss of the Clover Bank, with her skipper and seventeen good men. 
This vessel was an excellent example of what a drifter should be, and had 
been = one selected for the King to visit when he inspected the Dover 
Patrol. 

The Ninth Division of drifters, under Commander Venn, at the con- 
clusion of the operation had not received the orders to withdraw and was 
left at anchor on the Raabs. At 5 o’clock the next morning the enemy’s 
seaplanes were seen flying over the line of our buoys; they passed over 
the drifters but did not attack them. At 6.15 it was still hazy, and the 
crews of the drifters could hear noises as of aircraft trying to rise off the 
water. At 7 o’clock Commander Venn decided that they came from 
enemy torpedo craft firing machine-guns in order to sink mines. He 
ordered his ships to heave short ready for weighing. At 8 o’clock the 
haze began to lift, and he saw enemy destroyers inside our line of mines 


178. THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


firing at the buoys. He then understood the nature of the noise he had 
heard since 6 o’clock. He weighed at once and commenced to make for 
the Taunton Ridge shoal at full speed, and from there he steered for the 
position in which the Diane and her three indicator-nets divisions had 
been the previous day. The destroyers began to steam to the south-west 
inside the mine-field, and to alter course in chase of him, opening fire ; the 
shots, however, fell short. At 9.50 the destroyers had apparently arrived 
at the line of our mine-nets and were again using their machine-guns, 
evidently firing at the buoys and bottles to clear a way for themselves 
through the nets to get at the drifters. The drifters steered to the north- 
west, the enemy steering directly for them in line ahead. The enemy’s 
shots were now passing over and all round the drifters, and Commander 
Venn ordered his boats to scatter and do the best they could for themselves. 

The drifter Au Fait, which it was subsequently learnt had developed 
a hot bearing, was observed to be dropping behind. She was hit several 
times by the enemy’s fire, and was seen to be stopped, blowing off steam 
and covered with smoke. The enemy ceased firing and ran alongside 
her. The other drifters saw her crew take to their small boats as the 
Au Fait sank. 'The enemy, instead of continuing to pursue the remaining 
drifters, returned to Zeebrugge. Commander Venn collected the drifters 
and proceeded down the line towards Dunkirk. Skipper Charles Bridge, of 
the Au Fait, and all his crew were captured, and with the exception of 
the Skipper, who was released to Holland in the middle of 1918, remained 
prisoners till the armistice was signed. 

At the time it was not easy to understand why these three enemy 
torpedo craft failed to pursue and destroy or capture the whole of this 
division of drifters; but Skipper Bridge, who rejoined the Patrol after 
the armistice, reported that directly they came alongside his vessel the 
first question the Germans asked him was if the other drifters had got 
wireless. He at once replied, “‘ Yes,’”’ though as a matter of fact in these 
early days no drifter had either wireless or any armament except rifles. 
The enemy was evidently afraid that the drifters would bring our 
destroyers on to him, and considered discretion the better part of valour. 
The Skipper had no secret documents of any kind in his ship except the 
operation orders for the day. These he slipped into his drawers, and 
after he and his mates had been taken to Zeebrugge and locked up in a 
prison cell, he spent from g p.m. to 3 a.m. chewing the same orders. 
ee his ship was very much shot about none of the crew were seriously 
injured. 

On discovering that their messmates were prisoners the officers and 
men of the Drifter Patrol decided that they would endeavour to feed 
them with parcels through the Ladies’ Emergency Committee of the Navy 
League ; and when later another drifter’s crew from the Roeburn became 
prisoners they provided for them as well. The Drifter Patrol subscribed 
from their own pockets the sum of £539 17s. 5d. towards feeding their 
comrades who were in captivity. 

The remainder of the sections of nets to complete the barrage were laid 


THE DRIFTERS 179 


by the drifters without interference on the part of the enemy. The work 
of hauling defective, and shooting new nets, went on continuously. Some- 
times only one or two nets, on other occasions two or three miles at a time, 
until November 1916, when, owing to the short days and bad weather 
allowing so few occasions on which the work could be carried out, I 
ordered work to cease on the Belgian coast and be concentrated on the 
other barrages which had since been started. 

Occasionally we came across evidence of the loss of German vessels. 
In one case where nets had been damaged and mines fired the body of 
a German petty officer belonging to U 10 was brought to the surface. 
It is a matter of doubt if U 10 was or was not destroyed on this occasion.! 
On another occasion the chain that ran along the bottom of the nets could 
not be weighed on account of some great weight lying across it. Un- 
doubtedly a vessel had found her last resting-place in the barrage. 

At the same time the Drifter Patrol commenced a new and, as it proved, 
the hardest of all its endeavours to stop the passage of enemy submarines. 
This was no less than an attempt to build a continuous line of moored 
mine-nets, supported by buoys every 500 yards across the Channel from 
the Goodwin Sands to the Snou Bank off Dunkirk. This work was, of 
course, the heaviest when strong winds from the north-east or south-west 
occurred for any length of time. With spring tides the strength of tide 
reaching as much as five knots, with ordinary tides at least two and a half 
knots. The details of the barrage have been dealt with in the previous 
chapter, but no account of the work of the Drifter Patrol would be com- 
plete without a reference to the part they played in this gigantic task, 
involving unceasing work, a veritable labour of Sisyphus, but persevered 
in with dogged pluck. It was the only possible means I could devise, in 
the absence of good mines, for coping with the submarines passing the 
Straits. The new pattern mines were not available, and were not to be 
so for another year, so this Herculean task was tackled in the hope that 
it would to some extent meet the situation. 

All my officers were of opinion that the attempt would not succeed ; 
but I was determined not to abandon the project unless experience proved 
it to be an impossibility. This new barrage was patrolled at night by the 
drifters, with a very thin destroyer support. The reasons for this scant 
support have already been given, so they need not be further mentioned, 
but some form of look-out was essential to prevent the surface vessels 
attacking the barrage or breaking through down Channel, and the drifters 
were the only craft that I had for the duty. They were, of course, prac- 
tically unarmed, and if seriously raided by destroyers were bound to suffer 
considerably. But this is the fate of all videttes ; war is no play-time, and 
risks must be run by all classes of vessels if conditions demand their use. 

The raid of October 26-27th, 1916, has been dealt with from the 
destroyer point of view; it remains to tell the drifters’ story. 

Four divisions of drifters were patrolling the barrage on this night. The 
Eighth Division, consisting of six vessels, was between the Goodwin Sands 

1 The latest information states that this submarine was lost in the Baltic. 


18 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


and a buoy five miles to the ESE. The Tenth Division, of five vessels, 
was between No. 5 buoy and the tenth mile from the Goodwins on the same 
bearing ; and the Sixteenth Division, of six vessels, was between the roth 
buoy and the buoy marking the end of the Ruytingen Shoal; the Twelfth 
Division, of seven vessels, being between the Ruytingen and the Dyck 
Shoal. The yacht Ombra and the armed trawler H. E. Stroud were in 
support of this drifter line as well as the old 30-knotter Firt. The support, 
I may as well mention, was merely to afford aid in case a submarine 
fouled the nets. 

The Drifter Patrol suffered the loss of the following vessels, sunk : 
Roeburn, Spotless Prince, Ajax II, Gleaner of the Sea, Launch Out, and 
Datum, with severe damage to the drifters Waverley II, E.B.C. Pleasant, 
and the trawler H. E. Stroud, with the loss of fifty-five officers and men, 
killed and missing, believed drowned, and five wounded. One officer 
and nine men of the killed and missing were subsequently found to have 
been taken prisoners and taken to Germany. The Twelfth Division was 
not attacked and remained on patrol until daylight next morning. It 
was hard luck on the little vessels ! 

I issued the following memorandum at the time in appreciation of 
their services : 

‘“‘ The brunt of the attack fell on the advance patrol of drifters, whose 
presence and action signalled the arrival of the vessels and gave the alarm. 
It must be a matter of satisfaction to the Drifter Patrol that it was through 
their vessels that the warning was given. I regret the loss of so many 
valuable officers and men, but losses are inseparable from warfare. The 
drifters had on this occasion, and probably will again, have exposed 
positions in which to carry out important duties, and I have once more 
much pleasure in calling the attention of the Admiralty to the way in 
pee the Drifter Patrol have faced dangers and carried out their 

uties.”” 


It was the experience I culled from this unfortunate raid which made 
me insist so strongly that the proposals of the Barrage Committee (a bevy 
of officers without local knowledge and experience) for the patrol of the 
Folkestone-Gris-Nez mine-field in 1917 courted disaster. I knew that 
if their proposals were given effect to a massacre would occur. The pro- 
posals I made were better suited for submarine destruction, and at the 
same time safeguarded the vessels of the patrol. My objections were over- 
ruled, my successor adopted those of the Barrage Committee and a 
massacre occurred that should never have been permitted. The blame 
must rest on the coup d'état Admiralty for blindly disregarding my 
warning, the result of three years’ experience of the Straits of Dover and 
warfare in those waters. 

During the winter the drifters on the cross-Channel barrage had a bad 
time. They were cheered on three occasions by most suspicious damage 
to the nets; but as the strong tide prevented diving for examination pur- 
poses, so the loss of enemy vessels could only be assumed. The drifter 


THE DRIFTERS 181 


Protect was lost in 1917 in weighing a fleet of nets; a heavy explosion 
occurred, doubtless owing to a mine having drifted in the net. Only 
three hands were saved. 

On April 16th six German seaplanes attacked the mine-net division 
guarding the North Goodwin nets. One of these machines endeavoured 
to sink a drifter with a torpedo dropped from below the body of the 
machine; the torpedo missed the drifter, passing about twelve yards 
astern of her. The drifters engaged with their guns, but without result. 
This is an example of how the Germans wasted a new idea. Instead of 
trying to sink a large liner they gave away the system-in an attack on a 
little drifter. 

The German aircraft, however, did not always get off so easily, for on 
one occasion Lieutenant H. B. Bell-Irving, R.N.V.R., succeeded in 
capturing two of their seaplanes. 

A sad loss was sustained by us in June 1917, when the drifter George V 
was sunk through the explosion of one of her own mines. Lieutenant 
Conby, R.N.R., A. E. Cook, Skipper, and seven hands were killed and 
one man wounded. The case was clearly proved to be one where over- 
confidence led to neglect to carry out regulations, which is always one 
of the great dangers in handling explosives. Lieutenant Conby was one 
of the smartest and most gallant and hard-working officers in the Patrol. 
He had been previously recommended for the D.S.C. for his work in 
1916, which was duly presented to his widow. His loss was greatly 
deplored by the Patrol. 

In July, as already explained, the Belgian coast barrage was re-estab- 
lished. The drifters, of course, did the net work; but their aptitude for 
this class of work had been so increased by practice throughout the 
winter that, instead of taking seven hours as in 1916, in 1917 twelve miles 
of nets were laid and made active in one and a half hours. A very fine 
performance. 

A sort of beg-o’-my-neighbour game went on throughout the remainder 
of the year. The drifters finding a gap in the nets, would lay a “‘ fleet ” 
totally submerged, in line with the gap but nearer to the shore, so as to 
trap any vessel trying to use the hole. The enemy sank our battery 
boxes ; we laid dummy battery boxes for them to sink, and submerged 
the real batteries in water-tight mine-cases, and so on, new steps being 
always taken to defeat the devices of the enemy. 

The mines for the Folkestone—Gris-Nez barrage began to arrive in 
November 1917; and, as soon as the first four lines were laid, I com- 
menced the patrol of the area to cause the submarines to dive in the day- 
time. The drifters on the Goodwin—-Snou Barrage were gradually moved 
farther west, but the latter barrage was still kept in repair as a deterrent to 
surface craft. 

On the night of December 19th-2oth we bagged our first submarine 
in the mine-field. Several of the crew were blown up to the surface ; 
only one was picked up, and he died shortly afterwards. The drifter 
division which guarded that section received the reward. Towards the 


182. THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


end of the month I was able to increase the drifters on the mine-field 
barrage and brought a division of the Ramsgate drifters to assist. 

At the same time I kept a lively eye on the defence of the vessels on 
the barrage line. Such a defence was “ child’s play ” compared with the 
defence of the drifters on the Goodwin-Snou barrage towards the end of 
1916. To begin with, our destroyer force had been nearly doubled, and 
the line was fourteen miles farther down-Channel. No attack by the enemy 
should have gone unpunished, and, had the shallow mine-field I proposed 
been laid, it is doubtful if the line would have been attacked as was the 
case early in 1918. 

I wonder if the above rapid survey has conveyed a picture of the work 
of the Dover drifters. I wish that I could portray the mental pictures 
that arise of the labours of those vessels ; but imagination must fail unless 
the eye has seen the spray and the waves, the pitching and the rolling, the 
head gales and the dim outlines of the little vessels on dark nights, or the 
ploughing across the North Sea keeping station on the monitors. It 
requires a more facile pen than mine to translate such memories into 
words, 

What a volume really lies in the sentence: ‘‘ Worked on the cross- 
Channel barrage!” Twenty-five miles of nets hidden below the water, 
heavy moorings and buoys rising and falling with the sea, and a mill- 
stream of tide racing past; the hour or so of slacking water seized to 
effect repairs ; the cold, the cheerless disappointments of damage worked 
by tide and gale combined; miles of nets to be renewed—to describe all 
which this meant would merely bore the reader, and, even then, no 
adequate conception of the work could be conveyed. I have had to be 
content to suggest in these few pages the varied work of the Dover 
drifters, manned by ordinary everyday fishermen who in war time had 
been suddenly called upon to face the enemy and work new nets on new 
methods under fire, under the command of gallant officers of the Royal 
Naval Reserve. They worked as thoroughly, steadily, and pluckily as if 
fighting was their trade. After the raid of October 26-27th, 1916, they 
went on with their duty of watching the nets as unconcernedly as before. 
They had fought the sea all their lives and they fought the enemy with 
equal confidence. ‘They continued to patrol with the thinnest of support, 
since the waters in the forefront of the patrol, with their varied vital 
interests, were too extensive to admit of real support being given to them ; 
no larger vessels could be spared, so the brunt of the vidette work fell 
on the gallant little drifters. This work they cheerfully did, and earned 
a reputation of which they may always be proud. May good luck attend 
them! No officer of the Dover Patrol will ever pass a “‘ Dover” drifter 
without going on board and wishing her skipper and crew good luck in 
remembrance of their old association in the Great War. 


WATCHING THE DOVER STRAITS 


It’s dark as hell, and we cannot see a bare two cables’ length. 

The tide’s aflood, the sea flat calm, and the wind ain’t got no strength. 
We're watching the nets out here alone, just us and our other mates. 
The destroyers are well three miles away as we watch the Dover Straits. 


We helped at the bombardments by shooting our net defence, 

The shell fell thick around the boats, that made no difference. 

We lost the good old Sanda there, by one of them German Eights, 

But we’d sooner be there on a show like that than watching the Dover Straits. 


We laid out two bar-rages right up off the Belgian Coast, 

We've been mined and bombed and shot at, p’raps more than’s fallen to most. 
There’s precious little we haven’t done, ‘least, so we calculates, 

And there’s always this job, my lads, to do of watching the Dover Straits. 


We've a rifle and twenty rounds or so, and flares to give the alarm, 

To signal the Hun in case he comes ; ‘twill stop him doing harm. 

If their destroyers should come, my lads, we’re booked for the Golden Gates 
But no one shall say that we funked the job of watching the Dover Straits. 


183 


CHAPTER XI 
THE GREAT LANDING 


Nature of the coast—Some naval and military operations—How the scheme 
originated—The pontoons—Their construction—Surveying the coast—Aerial 
photograph—Tide curve—How the survey was checked—Isolation of the 
vessels taking part—How the landing-points were fixed—Tanks—How they 
were to climb the sea-wall—The military organisation—Preliminary pro- 
gramme—Description of the operation—Memorandum on the scheme— 
Discussion as to probable success—Abandonment. 


ET us turn our attention for a short time to that strip of the 
Belgian coast which lies between Ostend and Westende. 
Examining this part of the coast from the sea you would have 

seen the houses of Ostend crowded together with the spire of the church 
standing clear above them. Then, as your eye travelled to the right, the 
buildings would have thinned to a small group at the suburb of Raversyde. 
Here we knew there were six batteries of 4-inch and 6-inch guns; 
and, a quarter of a mile inland, lay the Tirpitz 11-inch battery. Further 
on some badly damaged houses marked the hamlet of Middelkerke and 
then, to the right again, Westende with its one hundred and twenty guns 
hidden in emplacements among the sand dunes. This formidable earth- 
work defended the extreme northern flank of the German line which 
extended away south to the Swiss frontier. 

It seemed to me that it should be an easy matter to land on a strip of 
this coast, drive back the Germans and include the triangle Ostend- 
St. Georges-Westende within our lines. However, Sir Douglas Haig, 
with greater knowledge, decided that the line Ostend-St. Georges would 
be too difficult to hold and that the Yser Canal was more easy of defence. 
He, however, agreed to a landing on this part of the coast, if, and when, 
the British Army arrived at Roulers, in the advance which he was hoping 
to make across the northern part of Belgium from Ypres through Pass- 
chendaele to the Scheldt. He was quite definite on the point that the 
operation was to be dependent on his reaching Roulers. At the end of 
1916 when the matter was discussed it seemed almost certain that he would 
reach that spot, for immense preparations were in progress for the Pass- 
chendaele offensive. Anyhow, I hoped that whatever happened, he would 
allow the Northern Army to land and raid the Westende batteries, even 
if he did not attempt to hold the coast, or start an offensive inland from 
the sea. 

The Army authorities are always shy of oversea landings. This is 
natural in cases where an army may be left stranded and dependent 


184 


THE GREAT LANDING 185 


entirely on oversea transport for its supplies. In the late War the English 
Channel was so narrow that, to the Army, this water hardly counted as 
sea. Moreover the fighting was taking place on friendly territory where 
bases and dumps could be installed. But, speaking generally, shore land- 
ings are not popular with the Army. However, in the case of the Belgian 
coast, I pointed out that, one hour after the landing, contact with our 
main Army should be established across the Yser Canal. So that the main 
objection to a shore landing was non-existent ; provided always that the 
troops would not be directly under fire while disembarking. 

If you had walked from Ostend to Westende you would have found that 
a good sea-wall had been built for nearly the whole way with a broad walk 
on the top. You would further have noticed that, as the tide receded, 
the sands became dry for some two hundred yards out to sea. How was a 
landing to be effected in the face of these difficulties ? 

It is well when solving problems of this nature to start by laying down 
the most desirable conditions ; then to eliminate one by one all those which 
are impossible, and to substitute for those which are impossible others 
which may be practicable, although, perhaps, these may fall somewhat 
short of the ideal. 

The most desirable method of landing troops is to steam a transport 
alongside a jetty and disembark the men over a multitude of landing 
stages. There were of course no piers for us to use on the Belgian coast, 
and the shallowness of the water prevented the use of transports. 
Monitors of shallow draught we had. Monitors then had to take the 
place of transports. But how about the piers? Could we build floating 
piers and tow them in? Perhaps, but then we should have to moor them ; 
and in order to get the monitors alongside of them they would have to be 
preposterously long, for not only would the pier have to be of sufficient 
length to stretch from the shore out to a place where there was fourteen 
foot of water at high water, but would have to continue for a distance 
equal to the length of a monitor, viz., some two hundred and fifty feet. 
Why not, then, disembark the men over the bow of the monitor on to the 
pier? This would disembark the troops too slowly, and it would be 
extremely difficult to keep the monitor end on to the pier in a tide such as, 
at the time of high water, swept along the coast. Why not then fix the 
pier to two monitors and let them push it in ahead of them? Herein lay 
the solution of the problem. 

It seems simple enough now, but it took days of thought to evolve the 
whole scheme. 

In the end I proposed that three pontoons should be built, and that 
each should be pushed in ahead of a pair of monitors. The pontoons 
could carry the guns, tanks, and a large number of men. Platforms and 
staircases could be built in the space between the monitors for the 
remainder of the troops to rush down from the ships on to the pontoons 
and away up the sloping sea-wall. But what had to be the shape of the 
pontoon ? At the extreme end it must be kept as shallow as possible so 
that it could be pushed right up on to the slope of the sea-wall; the 


186 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


draught at this end was fixed for eighteen inches. At the monitor end it 
could have the same draught as a monitor. And the length? This 
required most careful consideration. Obviously it had to be of such a 
length as would allow the monitors to be in fourteen feet of water when 
the shore end grounded on the sea-wall. In other words we had to find out 
exactly how far off the wall we would find a depth of fourteen feet at high 
water. No survey that existed gave any accurate soundings off the coast, 
and I was faced with the problem of how to survey, close in to the shore, 
a coast defended by a heavy concentration of gun-fire. Here aerial 
photography came to our aid. 

If you were to look down from an aeroplane when flying along the coast 
you would see distinctly the exact line where the edge of the sea lapped 
against the sandy beach (see Plate XV). This line would move gradually 
inwards towards the beach as the tide rose, and recede from it as the tide 
fell. Its exact position at any moment could be photographed from the air. 
Let us suppose that photographs were taken at each half-hour as the tide 
rose from low to high water ; and, for the moment, let us further suppose, 
that the tide rose one foot in each half an hour. Then No. 1 photo would 
show the line where the edge of the sea lapped the sand at low water ; 
this at high water would of course be covered by the sea to a depth of 
twelve feet (i.e. six hours at a foot each half-hour). No. 2 photo would 
show the line which would be covered by eleven feet of water at high 
water, and so on; thus the twenty-four photos would give a complete 
record of the distances from the shore of the places which would be 
covered to a depth of one, two, three, up to twelve feet at high water. 
These could be plotted, in the same way that contour lines are plotted 
on a land survey, and the slope of the beach obtained. This is exactly 
what we did. Two modifications were, however, n . 

The tide did not of course rise exactly one foot every half-hour, nor 
did we know exactly how much it did rise, nor its rate of rising. I there- 
fore sent Lieutenant Wardell-Yerburgh to submerge in his submarine, 
at night, close to the shore off Nieuport, with orders to remain for twenty- 
four hours, and measure the rise and fall of the water over his boat, each 
quarter of an hour, as the tide rose and fell. By this means we obtained 
the curve in the diagram showing the rate and extent of the movements of 
the tide at springs and neaps. After this had been obtained it was no longer 
necessary to photograph the beach at exact prearranged times, provided 
always that the time of taking was recorded on each photograph ; the 
height of the tide of that moment could be obtained from the tide curve 
and compared with the position of the sea-line on the photograph. 

One other precaution was necessary. The aeroplanes did not always 
fly at the same altitude, so the scale of the photograph was liable to vary. 
Two points were therefore selected, shown A and B in the photos, which 
were also marked on the Belgian ordnance map. The distance between 
these two gave a definite datum by which to fix the scale of each photo. 

The slope of the beach was obtained at five places along the coast. 
Three of these were finally chosen as those best suited for the landing to 


187 


THE GREAT LANDING 


va 
oO 
° 
> 
g| 
4 
- 


ART ))/ 


anonereowe AN &= 


188 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


take place. The length of pontoon necessary to reach the sea-wall from a 
spot where there was fourteen feet of water at high tide, was found from 
the photographs to be five hundred and fifty feet. 

A good deal of work had to be done before definitely fixing on these 
landing places. It will be noticed that the photographs show certain 
ridges of sand. The height of these and the depth between them had to 
be estimated by their rate of drying and filling as the tide fell and rose. 
Also the whole system had to be checked to make certain that photographs 
from fourteen thousand feet up in the air gave results that were sufficiently 
accurate. 

This was done by carrying out a similar survey of the coast to the east- 
ward of Dunkirk. The beach was accurately surveyed by a competent 
surveying officer, and the result was compared with that which had been 
obtained by the photographic method. The coincidence was found to be 
almost exact, for the results of these two surveys agreed within six inches. 
Not bad for photographs taken from fourteen thousand feet up in the air ! 

After the concurrence of Sir John Jellicoe and Sir Douglas Haig had 
been obtained, steps were at once taken to build one pontoon for trial, and 
to press forward with the details. Mr. Lillicrap, one of the most talented 
of the Naval Constructors at the Admiralty, was detailed by Sir Tennyson 
d’Eyncourt, Director of Naval Construction, to work out the details of 
the pontoon. 

It will be appreciated by all conversant with the stresses to which a 
vessel is subjected, even in a slight sea, that it was not particularly easy 
to design a structure of the above dimensions; but the energy and skill 
that Mr. Lillicrap brought to bear on the problem resulted in all 
constructional difficulties being overcome. 

Colonel Macmullen, D.S.O., was detailed by the Commander-in-Chief 
to assist in preparing the military side of the operation and was of the 
greatest help in evolving the whole scheme. Of course the problem from 
the naval point of view was not plain sailing. No one had ever tried 
to manceuvre two ships lashed together with a proboscis 550 feet long and 
of 2500 tons displacement ahead of them. I was, however, convin 
we could do it, and Sir John Jellicoe with his usual insight backed me up. 

One pontoon was built and tried in the Swin Channel at the entrance 
to the Thames in March 1917. The rapid building was due to the energy 
of Mr. E. J. Maginnis, Chief Constructor of Chatham Dockyard. Every- 
thing at first went wrong. Provisionally a small vessel was placed on each 
side of the pontoon to assist in steering, and the hawsers to the monitors 
were kept slack. This method was nota success. The guys were therefore 
hove as taut as possible, and the ships manceuvred with the pontoons 
rigidly attached to them. In this case when the ships altered course the 
wires parted ; but, fortunately, the high steering position of the monitors 
enabled a good view to be obtained, and I saw the wires parted owing to 
the jerk on them caused by the unavoidable slack, and the side-way 
velocity of the pontoon, and not to the steady strain during actual 
turning. ‘The remedy was obvious: namely, the use of chains. Chains 


Digitized by Google 


THE GREAT LANDING 189 


were got out to replace the wires, and after this there was no more 
trouble. The ships turned quite reasonably well, and a speed of approxi- 
mately six knots was obtained. The pontoon-cum-monitor scheme was 
now an assured success (see Plates XIII and XIV). The other two 
pontoons were immediately commenced and hurried forward with all 
despatch. 

The next problem was how to make sure that slow vessels like monitors, 
in a strong tide which set at its maximum strength along the shore at the 
time of high water, would hit off the exact spots for landing—at all events 
to within a hundred yards—-since, if more error than this were introduced, 
the contour of the beach might vary considerably in detail and the pontoon 
might not fit the beach. The Chief of Staff at the Admiralty, Vice- 
Admiral Sir H. Oliver, had previously suggested a method in use by 
telegraph ships as an aid in our operations. This was known as the 
“‘ taut-wire ’’ method. A boat ran out a fine piano-wire, one turn of which 
was taken round a registering wheel and its end secured to an anchor 
dropped in a known position. The number of yards which had been run 
from the position of the anchor could be read off at any instant from a dial 
on the wheel. This proved to be an extraordinarily accurate method even 
when running dead up or down tide. In fact, distances were measured 
as with a tape measure. The method of its use in this case was simple. 
Two leading-lights! were erected near Oost Dunkirk which could be seen 
from the offing. One P boat accompanied the leading monitor and 
dropped the anchored end of her wire about half a mile before the leading- 
lights were expected to come in line with each other. As soon as this 
happened a reading was taken of the dial—when, after this, the pre- 
arranged length of wire had been run off, she dropped an acetylene buoy. 
She then continued on the same course and dropped two more buoys 
which marked the places where the two other monitors were to turn. 
As a matter of fact, to avoid any chance of failure, two sets of leading- 
lights were erected in case one went out, and the boats were always run in 
pairs. To check the position of the monitors on approaching the shore, 
this operation was again repeated by two other boats, and when within 
three-quarters of a mile from the beach, was repeated by a third set. All 
P boats worked on nearly parallel lines and used the same leading-lights 
(see Diagram). If this method had been used by my successor in his 
attempt to block Ostend (see page 226) the failure to locate that Port 
would in all probability have been avoided. 

Having now cleared up three preliminary difficulties—the method of 
landing, the survey of the slope of the shore for the pontoons to be run in 
safely, and the method of hitting off, in a smoke-screen, the exact spots 
for landing, preparations began in earnest. The five 12-inch monitors 
in the Dover Patrol were reinforced by the Prince Rupert—another 
12-inch monitor—and by the Lord Roberts, a 14-inch monitor, but of much 


1 Leading-lights are two lights, one of which is higher than and behind the 
other ; when the two are seen directly in line with each other the observer knows 
he is on a definite geographical line of bearing. 


190 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Cakes is sa 


lee) 


vies 


Digitized by Google 


Method proposed for accurately positioning the Monitors on the great landing. 


am 


THE GREAT LANDING 1g! 


the same build as the 12-inch vessels. This last was to act as a spare ship 
in case of accidents to any of the other monitors. 

The monitors were banished to the Swin at the entrance to the Thames, 
out of sight of living habitation, and placed in strict quarantine. One 
destroyer, one P boat, and the Conqueror, a tug, as well as the hospital 
ship Liberty, were placed with them under the same ban. No communica- 
tion was allowed with the shore. One boat was detailed to bring off fresh 
provisions and mail-bags. Commander H. C. S. Rawson, with a staff, 
was given the duties of purchasing any special provisions asked for by the 
ships to supplement the service ration; a special staff of censors were 
established on the pier at Dover and every single letter written by Captain 
or First Class Boy was opened and read before transmission. 

A question arose at an early stage as to the use of tanks. They were, of 
course, of the greatest importance ; but, first, could they be carried on the 
pontoon ; and, secondly, could they climb the wall? The first question 
was answered in the affirmative by Mr. Lillicrap, with certain reservations 
as to their position. I never had any doubt that we could solve the second 
problem, so we took the matter in hand. The slope of the wall was 
30 degrees, and, as the tank reached the coping, the front part of the track 
would meet it with practically a line contact. The coping would then 
lift the tank bodily and reduce the area of the rear part of the track which 
was in contact with the sloping wall, with the result that as too little of the 
track would be in contact with the masonry, it would slip and the tank 
would fail to climb. Also the greatest angle that the tank, with its more or 
less limited horse power, could mount, was 45 degrees. The pull up 
over the coping would mean lifting its centre of gravity through 60 degrees, 
work far beyond the power of the engine. In order to ensure that the 
tank was not called on to climb more than a 45-degree slope it was necessary 
for the machine to commence the climb at least twelve feet from the base 
of the coping. This obviously necessitated building a sloping way, to be 
carried and placed in position by the tank itself, to enable it to climb the 


coping. 

One April 15th, 1917, I began work on the design of ways, and an exact 
replica of the sea-wall was built at the tank headquarters in France. We 
made inclined ways at Dover, and sent them over on the 28th ; and, on the 
3oth had our first trials. The track had wooden treads fitted. These 
were hollow and crushed, so we altered them to solid slats. On May rst 
the tank climbed the wall and went over the top. But the slats were in- 
convenient, so we took other improvements in hand. On June gth we had 
more satisfactory trials in France, and having proved that the project was 
feasible, I turned all the gear over to the Tank Corps, for still further im- 
provements to be carried out. In the end a perfectly satisfactory arrange- 
ment was arrived at by the able officers attached to that unit. 

The time of landing was fixed for daylight, on a day when the height of 
tide is not less than fourteen feet. Only about eight days in each month 
fulfilled this condition ; but a close study of the beach at different states 
of the tides showed that a greater number of days per month could be used 


192 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


if the pontoons had a raft extension ahead of them. The reason was that, 
at lower tide, the pontoon landed its bottom on the first ridge from the 
shore, with its nose over the hollow between that ridge and the higher 
part of the beach. This meant that there would be about three feet of 
water for the men, tanks, and carts to dip into on their way ashore ; 
whereas if a raft could be provided it would bridge across the hollow and 
land everyone well up on the beach. As an emergency expedient to extend 
the possible date of landing, such a raft was designed, but only as an 
emergency expedient. 

In the Swin the pontoons and rafts were moored about a mile from the 
ships so as not to appear to have any connection with them, and the 
joining up for practice was invariably done at night or in cloudy weather 
in case enemy aeroplanes should fly over and observe them. Stages and 
ladder-ways were built for conveniently running the troops from the ships 
on to the pontoon. The control-tops at the mast-heads of the monitors 
were fitted with smoke apparatus, and all possible preparations were made. 
Whenever the weather suited at night the monitors joined up and 
manceuvred. The strictest observance of seclusion was enforced. If aman 
was dangerously ill he went to the hospital ship. If anyone had died, he 
would have been buried there. 

In the meantime a “‘ quarantine ’’ camp had been established half-way 
between Dunkirk and Calais in the sand-dunes at Le Clipon, where the 
First Division took up their headquarters under Major-General Strickland, 
and much the same regulations as regards communication were enforced 
as we had adopted in the Swin. Complete unanimity existed between the 
Army and Navy, and the relations between Lieutenant-General Sir H. 
Rawlinson, Bart., Commanding the Fourth Army, to which the First 
Division belonged, and Major-General Montgomery,! his Chief-of-the- 
Staff, on the one hand and ourselves on the other, were most cordial. 

The broad scheme was to throw a party ashore at Middelkerke, another 
at Westende, and another half-way between, approximately each one mile 
apart. 

The whole landing, it was estimated, would take only twenty minutes. 
The General Wolfe and General Craufurd took the Middelkerke landing ; 
The Lord Clive (flag) and Sir fohn Moore second Maison Isolée landing ; 
the Prince Eugene and Prince Rupert the Westende landing. 


PROPOSED COMPOSITION OF THE LANDING FORCE 
(I) PERSONNEL 


Divisional Headquarters 
(a) G.O.C.’s Party, about nineteen officers, forty other ranks. 
(5) Signalling party, about one officer, fifteen other ranks. 
(c) Remainder, about three officers, 117 other ranks. 
Total : 
About 23 officers, 172 other ranks. 


1 Now General Sir Archibald Montgomery-Massingberd. 


Tet 


tee 
PS 


ta- 


& Be EH eB eK es 


er 


Bare Se SS w.k 


TANKS CARRYING INCLINED-WAYS IN FRONT OF THEM TO ENABLE THEM 
TO CLIMB THE COPING OF THE MIDDELKERKE SEA-WALL 


Note the formidable overhang of the coping at A. 


PLATE XI 


Digitized by Google 


TANKS, HAVING 


PLatTe XII 


PLACED THE INCLINED-WAYS IN POSITION, CLIMBING THE 
REPLICA OF THE SEA-WALL AND PARAPET AT MIDDELKERKE 


(d) Left Column 
2nd Inf. Bde., H.Q. 


Comp. Batt., R.F.A. 


Lowland F. D. Co. 


Det. A. T. Co., R.E. 


2/R. Suss. R. 

x /Northampton R. 
x/N. Lan. R. 
2/K.R.R.C. 

1/Co. 6/Welch R. 
13th Cyclist Bn. 


M.M.G. Batt. 
No. 2 M.G. Co. 
126th M.G. Co. 
Det. Tank Corps. 
No. 2 T.M. Batt. 
No. 2 Fd. Amb. 
Divnil. Sig. 
Intell. Corps. 


Total about : 


184 officers 
4468 other ranks 


(e) Centre Column 


3rd Inf. Bde., H.Q. 
Comp. Batt., R.F.A. 
26th F. D. Co., R.E. 
Det. A. T. Co., R.E. 
1/S. Wales Bord. 
1/Glouc. R. 
2/Welch R. 
2/R. Muns. Fus. 
1/Co. 8/Welch R. 
17th Cyclist Bn. (less 
1 Co. 


M.M.G. Batt. 

3rd M.G. Co. 

Det. Tank Corps 
3rd T.M. Batt. 
141st Fd. Amb. 
Divnil. Sig. 

Intell. Corps. 
Grenade Supply Co. 


Total about : 


175 officers 
4258 other ranks 


THE GREAT LANDING 


(f) Right Column 
1st Inf. Bde., H.Q. 


193 


3rd Comp. Batt., R.F.A. 


23rd F. D. Co. 

Det. A. T. Co., R.E. 
1/Black Watch. 
1/Cam. Highrs. 
10/Glouc. R. 

8/R. Berks R. 


6/Welch R. (less 2 Cos.) 
1/Co. 17th Cyclist Bn. 


M.M.G. Batt. 
1st M.G. Co. 
Det. Tank Corps. 
1st T.M. Batt. 
1st Fd. Amb. 
Divni. Sig. 
Intell. Corps. 


Total about : 
175 officers 
4295 other ranks 


Grand total 557 officers ; 13,193 other ranks ; or 13,750 all ranks. 


(II) TRANSPORT 


It was proposed to land the following transport for each column : 


Tanks 
Artillery 


2 male fighters and 1 female. 
4 13-pounder guns and limbers. 


4 13-pounder wagons and limbers. 
2 4°5-inch howitzers and limbers. 
2 4°5-inch wagons and limbers. 


M.M.G. Batt. 


19 side cars. 


8 motor cycles. 


Stokes carts 8. 
150. 


Right Column, about 3 motor, 183 pedal. 


Centre Column, about 4 motor, 298 pedal. 
Left Column, about 3 motor and 288 pedal. 


Hand carts 
Box-cars 2 
Cycles 

Motor car 
Ambulances’ 2. 


1 Sunbeam car with Centre Column. 


The whole of the transport was packed on the pontoon, with a gangway 
left for the men to use when disembarking (see Plate). 


N 


194 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The following 1s a description of the preliminary programme which, 
however, was not carried out: 

In order as far as possible to avoid detection, the pontoons were to be 
kept in the Thames till the last moment, and arrangements were made 
for the monitors to tow them over to Dunkirk in the dark. As the distance 
was too great to traverse in one single night, two consecutive nights had 
to be devoted to this work. The first half of the trip was from the Swin 
to Trinity Bay on the Goodwin Sands, where mooring-buoys were laid 
down for the pontoons. If seen here, they would probably be mistaken 
for a portion of a defence for the Downs. Here the monitors left them and 
went to Dover to coal. The maximum of 100 tons only was to be taken in 
so as to keep their draught as light as possible. The following evening 
they again picked up their pontoons and towed them to Dunkirk. On 
arrival at Dunkirk Roads the tug took the pontoons in tow and proceeded 
with them up-harbour. After they were in position, the monitors entered 
and moored alongside them to prevent them being seen from the town. 
Small craft were also used for this purpose wherever the water was too 
shallow for the monitors to lie alongside a pontoon. Air patrols were 
carried out both over the Downs and Dunkirk twice a day to prevent 
aerial photographs being taken. 

The seaplane base afforded a convenient embarking place for the troops. 
This was evacuated by the R.N.A.S., and the sheds were used to store 
some of the vehicles which were to be loaded on the pontoons. The others 
were parked in the vicinity. ‘Two nights were devoted to loading the 
pontoons—one only was loaded the first night, as it was sure to be a slow 
operation to begin with. ‘Two were to be loaded the second night. After 
loading, the pontoons were returned to their previous berths. 

The following afternoon the troops were to be embarked. Early in 
the day the ships lashed alongside each other and rigged the stages and 
ladders by which the men were to disembark from the ship to the pon- 
toon. An advanced party of twenty military officers and sixty men were 
to come on board early, the troops following at 4 p.m. From this time 
onwards a strong air patrol was to be kept up. The monitors were to 
leave for the roads as soon as loaded, and, immediately afterwards, the 
pontoons were to be sent out in tow of the tugs and moored at the buoys 
previously laid down in the roads. 

To avoid attracting attention by concentrating the eighty smoke-making 
motor launches too early in the day, the first flotilla was to assemble at 
Dunkirk the day before the actual start of the operations. The second 
flotilla was to assemble at Calais early in the day and sail for Dunkirk 
so as to arrive there at 7 p.m. The third flotilla was timed to arrive at 
7 p.m. from Dover, and the fourth flotilla at 7.45 p.m. At one hour after 
sunset the motor launches were to weigh and assemble opposite the 
monitors to which they were respectively attached. 

The destroyers available were all placed under the orders of Com- 
modore Tyrwhitt in the offing, except the escort for the monitors and one 
flotilla leader and six torpedo-boat destroyers, which were to act as a 


THE GREAT LANDING 195 


guard to the monitors destined to bombard the batteries east of Ostend. 
Three units each of three motor barges were loaded with stores and were 
to be grounded on the beach near each landing-place and left as a reserve 
from which the troops could, in case of necessity, help themselves on the 
following night. Intermediate between monitors, and on their outer beam 
when steering for the shore, were the small monitors, and between the 
small monitors and the 12-inch monitors were the smoke-making M.L.’s. 
Five minutes before grounding the small monitors were to open fire in 
order to deceive the enemy as to the exact positions of the landings. 
Just before grounding the 12-inch monitors were to open fire with 
12-inch and 6-inch guns, which had special charges so as not to injure 
the men and the pontoons by their blast. 

The following is a description of the forecasted operations. At dusk 
the monitors inside Dunkirk, with the troops on board, slipped and pro- 
ceeded to the anchorage outside, where each monitor lashed to its twin-ship. 
The tugs took the pontoons in turn in tow and towed them to the three 
buoys laid out each one mile apart—the General Wolfe’s buoy to the east- 
ward, that of the Prince Eugene to the westward, and the Lord Clive in 
the centre. As soon as the nose of each pontoon was made fast, every- 
thing was ready for the tide to change to the westward. When this came, 
and after the pontoons had swung, the monitors weighed, each pair moving 
up to its pontoon and dropping anchor to steady the ships while getting 
in the chains. Each pair reported ‘“‘ ready”? when secured, weighed 
anchor, and rode by the pontoon and the buoy to which the latter was made 
fast, and then waited. At 10 p.m. precisely the signal was made to slip 
and proceed, and each pair reported as they gathered way. The motor 
launches closed and took up their positions on the starboard side of the 
monitors. An escort of destroyers formed on the port bow of the General 
Wolfe, and two of the P boats with taut wire gear, one cable on the port 
beam. The Zuidcoote leading-lights were brought into line. The ships 
kept two points to starboard of their course on account of the tide, and the 
pass was navigated, the monitors turning under port helm into the West 
Deep and steered for the west end of the Nieuport Shoal. One mile 
before the Oost Dunkirk leading-lights were in line the P boats were 
ordered to drop the anchors of their measuring wires, and, as the lights 
came in line, the executive signal warned them to start the zero of their 
run. 
Then, in subdued excitement, came a dead silence, broken only by the 
lap of the water and the hum of the motor boats. Cocoa was served out 
to the troops. At last a flashing buoy dropped from one P boat and shortly 
after from another. These were for the rear ships to turn on. A mile 
farther the same was repeated, and yet another mile the third pair were 
released. About two cables before reaching their respective buoys the 
starboard monitor was stopped, the helms of both monitors put hard a- 
port, and the engines of the starboard monitor put half speed astern—all 
this was done gradually in order to prevent undue strain on the chains of 
the pontoons. Three points from the correct course to the shore the 


196 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


engine of the inside monitor was again put ahead, the helm eased, and the 
section, consisting of two monitors and the attached pontoon, steadied on 
the new course, which was in fact a point to starboard of their true course 
as the east-going tide was making. 

About this time the bombardment of the forts east of Ostend by the 
Soult, and of the Raversyde batteries by the Erebus and Terror would have 
commenced. Star shells were sure to be bursting well out at sea along the 
whole length of the coast and in the vicinity of the fleet. ‘The smoke screen 
was then started and the whole fleet headed for the shore. Suddenly the 
light-buoys from the next pair of P boats were seen close astern of the 
Prince Eugene, then a pair astern of the Lord Chive, then another astern 
of the General Wolfe. The course was corrected as necessary, and the 
next buoys watched for. The shore was now only a mile off. Half a mile 
from the beach the small monitors began to fire. At last eight-feet 
soundings with a bamboo pole were reported; both engines of the 
monitor were reversed, and the engines of the tanks started. Four feet ! 
Two feet! and then the pontoon gently grounded. The 12-inch and 6- 
inch guns of the monitors with reduced charges at fixed elevation roared 
out their hot bombardment. 

One yell, and the first four hundred troops burst ashore, the tanks 
began to move and almost at once reached the wall. Then a tense 
excitement: the tracks gripped, up the tanks climbed—the inclined 
planes were slipped. Yes, they were over! A flood of troops swarmed 
the wall. As soon as the troops were clear, carts, gun limbers, and sledges 
began to move off the pontoons, sailors and soldiers uniting in the work. 
The spare water-tins were dropped on to the sand. The steamboats laid 
their cables, and soon telephonic communication with the three head- 
quarters ashore was established. Soundings under the monitors were 
taken and the telephone cables got ready for slipping. As soon as the tide 
began to fall appreciably the monitors backed out to the offing, followed 
by the motor launches burning their stern burners. By this time the 
shells from the Raversyde batteries were dropping among the boats. 
The monitors when well clear reversed their engines and turned once more 
for the West Deep. 

Such is a description of what we hoped might happen, but, alas, it 
never came off ! 

While waiting for the advance to progress I wrote after careful thought 
and study the following memorandum on the difficulties and chances of 
the success of the operation : 


“* T think it is right to place on record clearly the reasons which induced 
me to recommend strongly the proposed landing operation. 

‘Every scheme must be judged by its practicability ; but practica- 
bility has a variety of interpretations. 

‘* A scheme that is impracticable is of course useless. 

** Total impracticability can usually be detected without difficulty. 

‘** Doubtful success must be carefully considered. 


THE GREAT LANDING 197 


‘* Success may be partial or complete. Ifthe result aimed at is obtained, 
even if the whole scheme does not work out as originally intended, the 
scheme must be judged to have been successful. 

‘“‘ Again losses must be balanced against the good obtained. If the 
object in view is of great importance, losses may be of relatively small 
importance, or the converse may be the case. 

“* Again, when dealing with losses, the future must always be kept in 
view, and we must not forget that irreplaceable losses may affect adversely 
future operations to a degree that would nullify any temporary advantages 
that may be gained. 

“‘ Let me, therefore, formulate certain questions by which to judge 
the whole matter. 


“‘(1) Is the scheme impracticable ? 

“(2) Is the object to be obtained of great importance ? 

“*(3) Are the probable losses such as to make the scheme undesirable, 
especially from the view of possible future operation ? 

““(4) Are the possible losses such as would affect the conduct of the 
Ww 


ar. 
“*(5) Are the difficulties—that is the tactical difficulties—in carrying 
out the operations such as to make its success doubtful ? 
‘* (6) What are the abilities and disabilities of the enemy in frustrating 
the operations ? 


‘* The first question may be dismissed. There is no inherent imprac- 
ticability in the scheme, no flaw which condemns it, and no gambling on 
the enemy doing the wrong thing at the critical moment. 

‘‘ As regards (2) there can be only one answer. It is of almost vital 
importance for us to take the Belgian coast. Its retention after the War 
by the Germans would be a death-blow to Great Britain as a nation. 
During the War it is an ulcer to this country, being not only a naval, but 
also an air base. It should have been taken long ago: it must be taken 
now. 

“(3) and (4) What are the forces implicated ? Six 12-inch monitors 
and one division of troops. If the whole of these were lost it would most 
certainly be regrettable, but the future conduct of the War would not be 
vitally affected. 

“ At the present moment the 12-inch monitors are of but little fighting 
value on the coast. The range of their guns is hopelessly less than that 
of the large coast batteries. They are of use in the protection of the left 
flank of the Army against the landing; but, now that we have sufficient 
troops on the coast, such a landing is most improbable. In no imaginable 
operations against German territory can these vessels be of any use. It 
is conceivable that, in the case of a rupture with Holland, or invasion of 
Dutch territory by the Germans, they might be of temporary value, but 
I can conceive of no other use to which they can be put. 

“Hitherto I have carefully nursed them, as I have had no objective 
against which I could use them which was of a value comparable with 


198 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


their own. Their range was but little over half that of the shore batteries. 
I could destroy neither water nor breakwaters ; no amount of bombarding 
by them could prevent Ostend or Bruges being used as submarine bases, 
unless the locks were totally destroyed at Zeebrugge. This, with 12-inch 
monitors, was an impossibility. ‘To attempt to knock out shore batteries 
of double their range and one-thirteenth of their vulnerable size was 
idiocy. But when an object of real importance arrives the whole question 
is altered and risks become imperative which heretofore were outside 
reasonable contemplation. 

‘‘(s) What are the tactical difficulties ? So far as the monitors are 
concerned these are nil. Smoke boats introduce the only possible trouble ; 
but, as these are divided into subdivisions of not more than ten boats, 
each under a capable officer, and they are wedged in between the large 
and the small monitors, they have not got much scope for going wrong. 
The particular operation suffers from none of the troubles that are inherent 
in shore landings from boats where a large number of landing craft have 
to be used and synchronisation is necessary. Tactically, the operation of 
merely bringing the monitors in their right formation with the smoke 
boats between them up to a landing-place is simple. 

‘© (6) What are the enemy’s abilities and disabilities ? 

‘* The enemy can disturb the operation in three ways : 


*“‘(a) Attack by mobile light craft. 
‘*(b) Gun-fire with both heavy and machine. 
*“(c) Mines. 


‘* We should be able without doubt to cope with (a). 

‘* As regards heavy gun-fire, this without doubt is a serious matter. 

‘There are a considerable number of guns 6-inch and above which 
can possibly be brought to bear on the landing; and, if it were openly 
carried out in full view of the shore, the whole scheme would be perfectly 
impossible. 

‘* The one thing which makes the thing possible, and on which all the 
success or failure hangs, is the smoke screen. 

“It is easy, looking at a chart, to minimise the enemy’s difficulties. 
Let us see what they are: 

‘ First, no knowledge of the whole scheme. 

‘‘ Second, no knowledge of approximate locality. 

‘“‘ Third, no knowledge of exact locality. 

‘“‘ Fourth, a dense fog hiding all movements. 

“ Fifth, the disorganisation of communications inherent to a long heavy 
bombardment. 

** Sixth, the loss of guns knocked out and personnel disabled. 

** Seventh, a most unholy strafe going on at all his guns. 

“‘ Eighth, after information as to the locality of the attack is received, 
the difficulty of knowing the distance off the shore, etc., at which to 
aim. 

‘* Ninth, no possibility of observing gun-fire owing to our smoke-screen. 


THE GREAT LANDING 199 


“Tenth, even if one landing-place is located and strafed, still two 
remain to carry out the scheme. 

‘* These are the difficulties as viewed from the shore—truly a formidable 
collection. 

‘* Even if the first and second were known to the enemy there remain 
the exact localities which it is almost impossible for him to discover. 
Speed of landing ts the great element of success. It is, in fact, the whole 
underlying principle of the scheme to get men in numbers ashore before the 
enemy has time to appreciate the landing points and to have a sufficient 
number of landing points to make a partial fatlure at one not of vital 
importance. 

“The question of machine-guns is one for military experience to 
decide. The tanks are considered enough to deal with any concentration 
of machine-guns that is probable. Moreover, the smoke should make 
machine-gun shooting of problematic efficiency. 

“* Secrecy should hide the main principles of the operation. 

“‘ Smoke should screen up to the moment of disembarkation. 

“Then the enemy has to appreciate the nature of the attack and to 
meet it in a very short time in the midst of all the disturbing elements 
of a previous prolonged bombardment and an existing heavy artillery 
strafe. 

‘“‘For a moment let us consider secrecy. ‘To what extent is ‘secrecy 
vital? If the exact details of the operation were known to the enemy he 
could defeat it; but this would lead him probably to adopt defences 
which would largely indicate that he had discovered what we proposed 
to do. 

“* It is possible that he might try for the bigger game of inflicting severe 
losses on us, instead of merely defeating the operation ; but if the danger 
of his position should we succeed be taken into account, and the fact 
that he can never know that at the last moment we should not change the 
exact place of landing, he is far more likely to go for the safer procedure 
of making the top of the sea-wall impregnable.? At present there is reason 
to believe that he is more concerned about the coast from Blankenburgh 
to the Dutch frontier than any other part of the coast. If we could land 
in this neighbourhood and support the landing up to the point of Bruges 
being held, then with our Ypres Army at Thourout the retreat of every 
soul on the coast should be cut off and a great disaster inevitable. Why 
should the enemy not forecast such an action on our part ? It is not a bit 
more impossible than for him to land on the coast of England and support 
such a landing. Look at the serious attention paid to such a possibility 
on the part of the military authorities in England. Of the two, (1) the 
Germans landing and supporting a landing in England, and (2) we landing 
and supporting a landing at Zeebrugge, the latter is much the easier. 
The more, therefore, he is convinced of our landing the more probable 


1 This is interesting, having regard to the failure of the Zeebrugge landing. 
This memorandum was written a year before that failure. 
* That precaution would have been visible in our aerial photographs. 


200 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


it is that his main attention will be concentrated on the east part of 
the coast. 

‘ That he is assured that we will land need not therefore be a disadvan- 
tage. 

‘“ If he knows our scheme, he will show it by his defences. 

‘‘ That he cannot know the exact places of landing is certain. 

“* Betrayal of secrecy should not lead to disaster ; since, either it would 
make the attempt impossible if he really knew all, or it would concentrate 
his attention on harmless portions of the coast. 

“We have the enormous advantage of knowing what we're going to do, 
where we are going to do it, and when. The enemy knows nothing, at 
all events, for certain, and therefore can only counter it at the last moment ; 
or, if he does find out, he will show us that he has done so. 

“If he 1s fortunate to get on to one landing unit with what guns have 
survived the strafing, and we lose a couple of monitors, the loss is small in 
comparison with the object the others may obtain. Now is the time to use 
these vessels when there is an objective of real value, and not necessarily 
to have them intact but rusty at the end of the War. 

“ Mines are, of course, a danger. High tide for the operations destroys 
the value of contact mines, and if observation mines! are employed, their 
number will have to be great to be sure of getting two out of three of our 
landings. Even if the pontoons were damaged, this need not prevent 
the troops landing. This is one of those chances that cannot be accurately 
forecasted. But the chance of a single mine stopping a landing need not be 
looked upon as very great. 

‘Nothing in war is a certainty. We in this instance have all the 
advantages of a new idea, and the initiative. We must not give the enemy 
credit for knowing all that we know, or endow him with the gift of 
prophecy. We must expect losses, but we have a big object in view. The 
scheme has been prepared with months of forethought and care, and there 
is good prima facie reason to suppose not only that it will be successful, 
but that it may be a very great success.” 


Now let us examine critically in the light of subsequent experience 
what were the chances of success. In the first place the enemy had no idea 
that the attempt would take place; this was undoubtedly the case as 
photographs of the sea-wall taken after the proposed date for the landing 
showed no sign that it had been defended. It was not until some time 
after the project had been abandoned and the scheme was public property 
that they put up obstructions against tanks. Without doubt our air patrol 
would have kept the enemy’s photographic machines off Dunkirk ; and, 
even if photographs had been taken, a plan view of the pontoons would 
have puzzled the enemy, as their connection with the monitors would not 
have been divulged. 

The earliest information that anything was happening could only have 


1 An observation mine is one connected by an electric cable to the shore, 
and fired when the observer sees a ship directly over it. 


- - ——— 


VaS LV DNINVALS LNOWA NI NOOLNOd HLIM SYOLINOW 


5 ee a on ry . sat 
ee Eee eee 


IX aLV1d 


Digitized by Google 


= + 
* 3 > 


o ; 
on 5, 4 
Eos E> ~~. 
P se ors 5 F - ~ a. é » 


—.ty 
-_ 


~ 


PONTOON BEING PLACED IN POSITION AHEAD OF THE MONITORS 


PLATE XIV 


~ sf 


f ap 


Sirah A ~CVOYVO | ‘Og 
Digitized by NAWIUSINR 


[ ] 
/ 
ra 


THE GREAT LANDING 201 


reached the Germans when the leading monitors were off Nieuport steering 
to the eastward. If a patrol had picked them up there, what information 
would it have conveyed ? Very little. The longer the monitors kept on the 
easterly course the more would the conviction have been strengthened that 
Ostend, or the eastward, were to be the places of attack. There is no 
reason to suppose that the ‘‘turn together ” towards the shore would 
have been observed. Even supposing it had been, what could have been 
done in one short half-hour, especially as the actual places of landing on 
the five-mile front from Nieuport to Ostend would still have been 
unknown ? 

With a frontal attack in progress at Nieuport, the German reserves would 
have had a double réle to play, namely, to reinforce the front line of the 
canal, and to defend the whole four miles of coast. It must be remembered 
that they would not have been able to draw troops from other points to the 
eastward, as guesses at our intention could at best have been but surmise, 
and the east side of Ostend could not safely have been robbed of troops. 
The bombardment of Jacobssen and Raversyde by the 15-inch monitors 
and g-2 shore guns, and Tirpitz by our 12-inch shore guns, would have 
lent colour to a dash on Ostend. The dropping of smoke buoys to the 
eastward of Ostend, which was extensively arranged for, could not 
have failed to draw attention by their lights flaming in the offing ; whereas 
everything to the westwards of Ostend would have been quiet except that 
ships were crawling to the eastward. ‘There was not the very smallest 
ghost of a chance that the enemy destroyers would have attacked the ships. 
The small monitor which was leading and our destroyers would have 
engaged them, and the enemy destroyers would have run away, as they 
invariably did, first perhaps firing their torpedoes at our destroyers.! 
The true spirit of offence, whereby their destroyers should have gone right 
on through the screen, was totally against the spirit of the German training. 

Now, the whole operation would have been enveloped in smoke, a 
dull red light showing, and this would have extended for three miles parallel 
to the shore, and, as the growing morning light faded, would have given the 
impression that the attack was passing away. 

The next thing the enemy would have known was the phosphorus smoke, 
which they might well have interpreted as poison gas. This would have 
entailed putting on gas masks, and, within a few minutes, a burst of firing 
from the small monitors would have at last awakened them thoroughly 
to the fact that the portion of the coast to the westward of Ostend was the 
object of attack. But, here again, if any attempt at concentration on the 
points fired at had been made, the enemy would have been “sold,” 
as the small monitors were each half a mile from the real points of attack. 
So that it was not until the pontoons grounded in the impenetrable mist 
of smoke, and the 12-inch and 6-inch guns of the monitors crashed 
forth at point-blank range that the true positions would have been revealed. 
For five minutes the guns would have thundered, during which time the 


1 The speed of our destroyers was strictly limited to eighteen knots to avoid 
wash. See p. 109. 


202 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


tanks would have moved forward with the first attacking party, and then 
firing would have ceased just as the tanks were timed to top the wall. 

The whole operation would have been simplicity itself from our 
point of view, and shrouded with impenetrable mystery from the enemy. 
The audacity of attacking the sea-wall would never have occurred to them, 
because they would never have thought of the smoke-screen. 

Now, as regards heavy gun-fire, the chief batteries to be feared were the 
6-inch batteries at Raversyde, but what were they going to aim at? 
Nothing would have been visible through the smoke, and naturally knowing 
nothing about the pontoons and monitors, they would not have known the 
distance from the wall out to sea at which to aim, or the exact position 
longitudinally along the coast. The very strong air patrol would have 
interfered with spotting by the enemy machines after daylight. The 
15-inch monitors and the 12-inch and g-2-inch guns which we had 
previously landed would also have largely paralysed these batteries. Even 
if the Germans had known of the landings it would have been most 
difficult for them to frustrate them without raising a parapet on the sea- 
wall, especially as the points of landing were, in practice, certain to be 
piven displaced from the exact point which had previously been 
selected. 

From the Naval side of the operation every condition argued success. 
The military authorities of the First Division, viewing the project from 
their standpoint, were also confident. A sea-wall had been built in 
the isolation camp and the men practised in scaling it.1_ A model of the 
whole length of the coast, about a hundred feet long, had been made, and 
the marks and houses at the different points studied. 

Diagram Page 190 shows the proposed progress ashore, the original jumps 
and the areas of the subsequent push. It will be seen that the distance be- 
tween the Westende landing and the British lines was a bare mile and a 
half, with all the chief batteries taken in rear. The other landings were 
behind the second line of defence. So far as could be foreseen, the frontal 
attack, combined with the surprise attack in the rear, would have resulted 
in the Germans being surrounded; they would have been completely 
overwhelmed. The landings for this operation are shown as being at 
Middlekerke—Westende and an intermediate position. 

Another scheme was also prepared in which the original was modified 
so as to be merely a jump to destroy the guns and hold Westende without 
a further advance along the coast being meditated. The landings in this 
case were to be at Westende and at two positions to the westward of 
those mentioned above. 

The plans unfortunately were never put into operation. July and 
August passed, and our troops were still held up on the Passchendaele 
Ridge. The advance of the troops never reached Roulers. All July and 
August we eagerly awaited an increased rate of advance, but the weather 
was against the expected progress. ‘The tides in September suited, but 


1 A subsequent examination of the sea-wall showed that it was less formidable 
than one which we had built in France for our experiments. 


THE GREAT LANDING 203 


the mornings were closing in ; and, as time of landing had to be about high 
water, it became evident that, if it was to come off in October, it would 
have to be before dawn; but hitherto the Army had desired daylight for 
the attack. 

A conference was therefore held at G.H.Q., at which I urged that in 
default of the Army reaching Roulers, we should carry out a modified 
operation—seize the coast merely from Middelkerke to Nieuport, destroy 
the one hundred or so guns installed in that corner, and give the Navy 
a chance of landing heavy guns at the Palace Hotel to range the Zeebrugge 
lock and Bruges dock. Of this, however, the Commander-in-Chief did 
not approve. (See Postscript.) 

But, as Sir H. Rawlinson was quite prepared to carry out the main 
operation before dawn, if there was good moonlight, the Commander-in- 
Chief approved of this being done should the Army be able in the meantime 
to advance. Everything was therefore kept ready for the project all 
through September and half of October. The only difference it made to 
us was that the glare of the phosphorus burners would be apparent ;_ but 
this, extending over a length of three miles, did not worry me. After the 
enemy had appreciated that the glare was approaching, it would have been 
impossible for him, in the twenty minutes only that would elapse up to the 
time of landing, to take any active measures to forestall the attack. 

One kindly act on the part of General Strickland and his officers was 
to invite the interned monitors’ crews to visit the camp of the First Division 
at Le Clipon. This proved a very welcome change from life shut up in 
the Swin. The monitors went over in pairs and anchored off Le Clipon, 
and the men had three days ashore. Visits to the Front under good 
surveillance were arranged, and the officers and men thoroughly enjoyed 
their visit. 

On October 15th the First Division was ordered to move from the coast, 
and the operations were abandoned for that year. Disappointment and 
gloom for a time settled on us all. 


POSTSCRIPT TO CHAPTER XI 


The Chief-of-the-Staff, British G.H.Q., informed me on August 7th, 
1917, as follows : 


‘* The battle of the 31st went very satisfactorily, and I have no doubt 
that we should have been well on by now but for the rain. As it is, of 
course, we have fallen behind our programme, and the men have had 
very exhausting work in getting supplies, etc., forward. . . . Unfortun- 
ately we cannot give you dates, not knowing how far the weather will 
mend, or how much resistance the Bosch will be able to get out of his 
men; but, so far as one can guess, the September date is more likely 
now than the August one.” 


204 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


A report was sent by the C.-in-C., B.E.F., to the First Sea Lord 
regarding a meeting held at Advance G.H.Q., between the C.-in-C., the 
Chief-of-the-Staff, the G.O.C. Fourth Army, and myself. The following 
are the important portions : 


“‘ Owing to the bad weather and the consequent limited advance made 
by the Fifth Army, the situation had not yet been reached in which it 
had originally been contemplated that the Fourth Army operations and 
landing would be undertaken ; moreover, it does not appear probable that 
this situation would be reached at an early date. . . . 

“ Vice-Admiral Bacon pointed out the extreme value to the Navy of 
obtaining possession of the coastal strip between Westende and Middel- 
kerke. The Field Marshal commanding in Chief stated, however, that 
from a military point of view he was not prepared to undertake the 
combined Naval and Military operation until the conditions already 
postulated had arisen; viz. that the enemy had been seriously defeated, 
the Passchendaele-Staden Ridge occupied, and the enemy’s positions on 
the coast seriously threatened. He further stated that he would not 
countenance a landing operation being utilised to facilitate the passage 
2 the River Yser and the capture of a defensive position on the east 

ank, 

‘* It therefore became necessary to consider the question of postponement. 
This was complicated by the fact that during the period of suitable tides 
in the third week of September, high tide occurs between midnight 
and 4.30 a.m., i.e. in the hours of darkness, and during the suitable period 
in the first week in October it is still earlier. 

“* During the first week of October there is a moon all night. 

“* Vice-Admiral Bacon said that from some points of view early October 
would suit the Navy better than early September, provided that the Army 
was prepared to undertake the night fighting involved. 

““ General Sir H. Rawlinson stated that there would be no objection 
to carrying out the operations at night provided that there was a 
moon. 

“The F.M. Commanding in Chief thereupon decided that, in view of 
the present situation on the Fifth Army front, it was necessary to post- 
pone the landing operation to the first week in October. If other factors 
were then favourable, the combined operation on the coast would be 
carried out about that period before daylight. . . .” 


On October 15th came the death-blow, when the Chief-of-the-Staff 
informed me as follows : 


“* Persistent ill-luck in weather conditions has delayed our advance so 
much that there is no possibility of our being ready for the combined 
operation this month. Sir Douglas has written to-day to Admiral Jellicoe 
to tell him this. Given any sort of normal weather we still expect to effect 
a good deal more before winter sets in finally ; but I presume that even 
if we get far enough to render it possible from the land point of view, sea 


THE GREAT LANDING 205 


conditions after October are unlikely to admit of the full programme this 
year. 

“It is very disappointing, especially for you after all you had done to 
ensure success ; but, you know, we have done our best, and the weather 
has not been kind. From our experience we are convinced that with 
good weather the full programme would have come off.” 


THE DREAM 


Slowly move the ships in darkness piercing through the inky night, 
Monitors lashed close together, pontoons reaching out of sight. 

Eighteen thousand men assembled, chafing at the progress slow, 

Wait the aim of their ambition, wait the time to strike the blow. 

Breezes soft blow warm, for summer with its heat has scarcely gone, 
These will bear our shelt’ring smoke-cloud and blot out the fleet at morn. 
Light-buoys gleam, and mark the turnings for our passage to the beach, 
Ships now swing and head the pontoons for the points they hope to reach, 
Roar of guns at shattered Nieuport, Westende batteries reply, 

See | the shore attack in progress lights with glare the neighbouring sky. 
Star-shells burst and light our vessels with the brilliance of their rays. 
But our smoke spreads sweeping onwards an impenetrable haze. 

Dawn now tints the former darkness ; blackness turns to ashy grey, 
Marks the near approaching advent of that long awaited day. 

Bursts of firing from the vessels marshalled close on either beam, 

Shells from batteries soon answer, heralded by vicious scream, 

Then our 12-inch join the clamour, hurling death at point-blank range, 
Each man grips his rifle firmly, final whispers interchange. 

Tanks are throbbing, engines warming, ready for the classic climb, 
Minutes never passed so slowly ; seconds seem long hours of time, 
Then at last faint shock and grating, one great rush and one great cheer 
As the tanks and living columns in the smoke-cloud disappear. 

But that shout our dream has ended, broken is our reverie, 

Wake to find that we’ve been dreaming of what never now can be. 

Cruel fortune rudely shattered that matured and cherished scheme, 

All that might have been has faded. Nothing left us but a dream. 


206 


CHAPTER XII 
PLAN FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 


Original plan for blocking Ostend—How to block a channel with two ships— 
Reasons for abandonment—Uselessness of blocking against submarines— 
How channels can be cleared—Commodore Tyrwhitt’s proposals—Plan 
for attack on Zeebrugge Mole—Attack on the outside—General scheme— 
Firing on lock-gate—Reasons for taking monitors bow-on to the Mole—The 
difficulties of the German Command—Smoke—The attack made on St. 
George’s Day criticised—Reasons for the failure of the Mole landing—The 
Admiralty scheme—Finding Ostend and Zeebrugge—My notes to Sir Roger 
Keyes—The account in the Official History of the War. 


N 1915 I worked out a scheme to destroy the lock-gates and attack 

the Mole at Zeebrugge. The Mole in those days had little on it to 

destroy, but its capture was a stepping stone to the attack on the 
lock-gates. This scheme was thoroughly discussed with the First Sea 
Lord, Sir Henry Jackson, with the Chief-of-the-Staff, Sir Henry Oliver, 
and with Admiral of the Fleet Sir Arthur Wilson, and was abandoned 
chiefly on account of the difficulty of creating a good smoke-screen. 
The only method we had in those days of obtaining smoke was by using 
a combination of ammonia and SOQ, (sulphurous anhydride) gas. ‘Twenty 
trawlers were fitted out with the apparatus and trials were carried out in 
the Thames. It is true that smoke was produced, but it was too localised 
and not sufficiently persistent on a dry day to be efficient as a screen ; 
moreover, great trouble from corrosion of the nozzles of the jets was 
experienced during a reasonably prolonged operation. Such a difficulty 
could have been overcome, but the main defect, of want of persistence of 
the smoke, was fundamental. The attempt was therefore postponed till 
a more efficient screen could be produced. 

At the same time—that is in 1915—I evolved a scheme for blocking 
Ostend, and two old merchant steamers and the obsolete cruiser Apollo — 
were allocated to the work. All the merchant ships which were available 
were, in themselves, too short to block the channel. It was, therefore, 
necessary to use two ships in order to obstruct the channel completely. 
The problem was how to get these two ships into correct position. In the 
solution arrived at I arranged to put the two steamers one each side of 
the Apollo with their bows towards her stern. A hawser was taken from the 
bow of each steamer to the bow of the other and the ends of these two 
hawsers were taken to the stern of the Apollo. 

The modus operandi was for the Apollo to steam stern first, with the mer- 
chant vessels steaming ahead alongside her, from the Thames to Ostend, 


207 


208 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Sows NG Aaaancinenr oF 
Towine Hawstas , Suirs 


Bene Stcvato Avonesioe 


Seip | Enos 


a 

8 

i] 

' 

i 
Suir [frvos 


Srean 


Ouree Snips ToaeT Her 
HAWSERS SUPPIO ANDO 


of ESTACADE~, 
ESTACAOE A 


CHANNEL Way BiocKto 


OF 


WALL 
“\ WALe 


N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
; 
S 
m] 
N 
N 
N 
N 
\ 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
‘N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
. 
: 


(Mdnbhtd deh uhatud huh hud huhu uhuithdoididiad Ld.tiéidédiiiitt td a 


Method of blocking a channel using two block ships. 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 209 


and into the channel between the piers (Diagram, Phase I). When they 
neared the place they were to block, the ropes securing the sterns of the 
steamers to the Appolo’s bow and the springs were slipped, the helms of 
the merchant steamers put hard over outward (Phase II), the blowing-up 
charges were then fired, and the Apollo started to steam ahead. Since the 
hawsers to the bows of the steamers were kept fast in the Apollo, the bows 
of the two blocking ships would be drawn together, their sterns would 
swing outwards and ground on the sides of the channel (Phase III). 
This action would have caused their sterns to be forced well on to the mud 
at the sides of the channel, and at the same time their bows would have 
been locked together by the hawsers. The Apollo would then part or 
slip the hawsers and steam out to sea. The ships were prepared and the 
arrangements tried in the Swin at the entrance to the Thames; but, when 
near conclusion, the proposals for landing troops in Ostend led to the 
postponement of the operation. 

I shall never forget the feeling of relief which I experienced that I had 
not blocked Ostend when I was confronted with proposals for landing 
troops in that harbour. For, had I done so, such a landing could not 
possibly have been carried out. As a matter of fact it never was carried 
out, being condemned as impracticable after extensive study by General 
Sir Aylmer Hunter-Weston and myself. But at the time that the enquiry 
was initiated I saw only too clearly that I would have blocked the harbour, 
temporarily for a week or two, to submarines ; but permanently to larger 
vessels. This gave me a distaste of blocking operations, for blocking may 
act like a boomerang to the detriment of the general conduct of the War. 

To put the matter quite bluntly, it was an absolute physical impos- 
sibility to close either Ostend or Zeebrugge to the passage of submarines 
short of building a stone barrage right across the entrance piers in the case 
of Ostend, or across the canal in the case of Zeebrugge. Any attempt to 
block with blockships, however successfully these might be placed, would 
not close the channel to submarines for probably more than twenty-four 
hours, and most certainly not for longer than ten days ; but such blocking 
would infallibly prove a permanent obstruction for, say, five or six months, 
at least, to larger vessels. 

It was impossible to foresee what the future requirements of our troops 
ashore might be; in fact up to September 1917 it seemed most probable 
that the harbours of both Ostend and Zeebrugge might be required as 
seaports from which to feed our Army if the Germans were forced to 
relinquish the Belgian Coast. It therefore appeared to be a suicidal 
policy deliberately to undertake what in reality was a useless operation, 
when, by so doing, very material damage to the free movement of our Army 
might result. 

I could with ease have placed blocking-ships in the channels both at 
Ostend and Zeebrugge any time during 1917, but I looked on such an 
Operation as useless, and, until the abandonment of the Passchendaele 
offensive, as harmful. 

Let us see why so-called ‘‘ blocking’ was useless against submarine 

te) 


- 


reye oe. ep 


=< 


re oe 
Rae 3 


ee 


+9 


eae Pee 5 


pel OF 
” Fy 


oh) dn 


cep terre. 


«0 Rats 4 ; 
le SO RIAY 


210 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 
; NK a i i oe m 2 eS 3) Ree }: % 4 * vs ! 5 J : A Eo Poh 
ahh ny be: r i ‘Pp £2 oh ie ; fi x 4 ; . " : y aan “. 3 
¥ rai A Aptaabe: Rady x. toate, 4 wT RM. 
“. ¥ " . rat, 2 / “ h eS 
S i y RS , yr : re re ; nts 


Digitized by Google 
ee © 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 11 


boats and yet dangerous to larger vessels. Merely to dump down ships 
in a channel is a useless waste of time and material unless by so doing 
the exit of the craft against which the blocking is directed is prevented. 
It may be accepted as a maxim that any blocking operation must be ineffective 
unless the rise of the tide above low water ts appreciably less than the draught 
of water of the vessels which it ts intended to block in or out. 

To block a harbour against large vessels—that is to deny the use of the 
fairway to the traffic of large ships—is comparatively easy if the channel is 
narrow and not too deep, like the harbour entrances on the northern French 
and Flanders coast. It is, however, a practical impossibility to block 
such a harbour, if in the possession of a determined and resourceful enemy, 
for more than a few days so as to make it useless for the navigation of small 
vessels of a draught similar to that of submarines and destroyers. The 
reason is a simple one. Large vessels, when navigated in and out of these 
harbours, occupy a considerable portion of the fairway both as regards 
breadth and depth. After reasonably skilful blocking no room should 
exist for a large vessel to pass round the extremities of the sunken block- 
ships, so that, in order once more to pass deep-draught shipping, the whole 
of the centre of the blocking-ships must be removed down to the bottom 
of the channel. This in reality, means lifting the ships, a long and difficult 
operation. 

To remove a ship piecemeal necessitates under-water diving operations, 
which in a tideway are bound to be lengthy. To scatter a ship with 
explosives is worse than useless, as the torn ribs and plates leave snags 
dangerous to navigation and a tangle of metal very difficult to remove. 

If, however, it is merely desired to pass out vessels with small beam and 
with fourteen feet, or so, draught from a place where there is a rise and 
fall of tide of fourteen feet ; then, if the portions of the block-ship which 
are above low water are removed, small craft can steam out at high tide ; 
or, in the particular localities under discussion, for one hour each side of 
high water. | 

The work of dismantling and removal can be done above water as the 
tide falls and is therefore a reasonably quick and simple operation. 

It mattered little to the Germans at Ostend and Zeebrugge if the ingress 
and egress of their submarines and destroyers was restricted to about the 
time of high water, since they never had reason to send boats in or out 
from Bruges in a hurry ; though, of course, any obstacle was bound to be 
an inconvenience. They never rushed their destroyers out to attack ours 
in daylight, and their coast batteries ensured leisurely entrance to their 
harbours. For prearranged raids their destroyers could be passed out 
on the high water next before the raid, and their submarines also could 
leave at definite hours each day. Rapid passage at all states of the tide 
was unnecessary either to their destroyers or their submarines. 

It will, on consideration, also be appreciated that, in order usefully to 
block a harbour against submarines and destroyers, there should be 
insufficient mud ahead or astern of the blocking-ship, when sunk, to 
permit a passage being dredged ; as dredging is a quick and very simple 


212 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


way of making an exit. Again, blocking-ships as a rule draw at least 
sixteen feet of water, so that their sterns when they ground will be in 
about this depth of water; and, unless the bank is almost “ steep-to,”’ 
very little dredging will be required to make a channel for submarines and 
destroyers to use at high water (see Diagram). The tide rushing through 
so small a cut will enlarge it and keep it scoured. 

If no such channel can be dredged a passage can be cut through that 
portion of the ship which is above water at low tide. The following 
figures give a rough conservative estimate of the time and work involved. 

Take the case of cutting a channel 48 feet wide through a ship of 60 
feet beam with three decks, and with the hull 12 feet above high water, 
to be cut down fourteen feet below high-water mark to the low-water 
level. The plates should be cut into pieces of 12 feet by 12 feet superficial 


Submanine 
possi r abstuctan, ‘ 
hip apt wd. 


. , ot "es a~ » af “ owe fea. « 
a er) ~— ~ ji tewe eee ae a. Maen . a 
Sree i SE: BEF ere ge en RNS Pn a et fan pn Pe 


Showing the impossibility of blocking a channel against the passage of submarines. 
area; and when cut, lifted with derricks, and either taken away in lighters 
or landed on those parts of the ship that are to remain. The total number 
of linear feet to be cut with oxy-acetylene blow-pipes would be about 
3000. Assume each burner under the best conditions will cut simple 
plating at the rate of 100 feet an hour; and, taking angles into account, 
call this 30 feet per hour, which is a very moderate estimate. One hundred 
hours with one burner or ten hours with ten burners, would be 
sufficient to cut the gap required. Now for contingencies and delays, 
waiting for tide, removing concrete, etc.—call the ten hours ten days, 
that is, multiply the time by twenty-four, which should be an ample 
margin. It becomes apparent what a comparatively simple job it is. 
With the large fall in tide, all the work can be done above water. Much 
concrete cannot be carried high up in the ships because of stability, 
since if weights are carried high up, they must also be carried low down, 
and if both high up to make the blocking more secure, and low down to 
give stability, the total draught of water of the blocking-ship is increased 
and the passage round the ends similarly enlarged. Even so, concrete 
is by no means difficult to remove when working above water. If, after 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 213 


this work has been completed, it is desired to cut down a little below low- 
water mark, the sides can be blown out with small local charges of high 
explosive ; which, if judiciously placed, will bend the plates outwards, 
and cut through the beams without scattering the wreckage broadcast, 
and causing dangerous snags below water. 

Now Ostend and Zeebrugge were used very little by enemy merchant 
ships. Occasionally one of these slipped round the coast, but this was a 
rare occurrence. So that to block either of these ports with block-ships 
meant that it would be blocked for four or six months against large ships, 
which the enemy did not want to pass, but which we ourselves confidently 
hoped to pass during an advance in Belgium. At the same time a channel 
could be cleared by the enemy in twenty-four hours to allow passage to 
destroyers or submarines, the very vessels we should have liked to block in. 
In fact, I had planned that before the enemy evacuated either Ostend or 
Zeebrugge, a joint local attack by our Army and Navy should be made to 
seize the harbours and prevent the enemy closing them by blocking or 
local damage. Faced by these hard facts, in association with the point 
of view that the Army during a prospective advance on the coast early in 
1916 would entail the use of these harbours ; there was no option but to 
abandon the operation of blocking Ostend, which would have been a neat 
and probably a successful undertaking. 

It may be asked with some reason if blocking was so undesirable why 
did we bombard the lock-gates at Zeebrugge ? The answer is a simple 
one. If a lock-gate were hit when shut, the chances were that the canal 
would be efficiently blocked for some weeks ; for a caisson must be dead 
true to slide in and out of its housing position. Should, however, we 
require to use the canal it was not so long a job to repair the caisson as to 
remove a blocking-ship, especially as we had accurate plans, and, in case 
of necessity, could have built a new one in England. Damage to the caisson 
blocked the canal efficiently against small craft for some weeks ; blocking- 
ships did not do so. At the same time, when the coast landing was 
imminent, and during the advance to Roulers, I fired an Ostend dockyard 
rather than Zeebrugge, since it was not the moment to attempt to do 
deliberate and expensive damage to the locks. On the other hand, the 
destruction of the workshops in Ostend to some degree assisted the 
advance by delaying any urgent mechanical repairs that might be necessary 
to the material of the enemy. 

The advance on the coast in the spring of 1916 never took place. The 
attack by the Army was made further south ; but it was arranged that if 
good progress were not made in the Southern area the plan of an attack 
along the coast should be revived. The harbours, therefore, were kept 
open during 1916, and no attempt was made to block them. 

A proposal from Commodore Tyrwhitt was carefully considered by 
Sir John Jellicoe, Sir Henry Oliver, the Commodore, and myself. It 
consisted of a surprise attack on the lock-gates. I was not in favour of 
the particular scheme proposed and was strongly averse to the operation 
being carried out at that time; as we were then on the eve of the proposed 


214 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


advance by our Army on the Belgian coast, and of the great landing. At 
that time the necessity of keeping the harbours unblocked was paramount ; 
and, further, the larger scheme of landing rendered the use of our most 
efficient smoke-screen (which so far had not been divulged to the enemy) 
most inadvisable. Again, any such operation would have called his atten- 
tion to the unprotected state of his coast against attack, and by so doing 
would have hazarded the success of the far more important operation. 

In November 1917, however, the disintegration of Russia pointed 
conclusively to the improbability of an advance along the coast in 1918, 
and the probability that the initiative in attack would pass to Germany. 
The landing on the coast which we had planned was definitely ruled out 
by Sir Douglas Haig as he could not afford the men for the purpose. 
This was a great disappointment to every one. Officers and men who had 
been interned up the Thames on the tiptoe of expectation naturally felt 
the reaction. I, therefore, considered it highly desirable to have some 
operation to compensate them for the one that had been abandoned. 
There was no longer any objection to our using our smoke-screen inshore, 
as no other scheme would be prejudiced by our giving away our ability 
to creep close in without been accurately observed ; my mind, therefore, 
reverted to the attack on the mole and lock-gates at Zeebrugge as originally 
planned in 1915; and I approached the subject of an attack with the 
experience of two years of operations behind me. 

The use of motor launches and phosphorus, or other methods of 
making smoke, made an attack on the Mole possible in 1917 which had 
been condemned as impossible in 1915 for the want of these auxiliaries. 
The main modification that experience led me to make in the original 
plan was to land on the outside of the Mole instead of the obvious inside, 
as the former seemed almost an impossibility, and therefore a landing 
would be less expected from this quarter. The “‘ impossible ’’ is generally 
easy, if only sufficient time and thought are available to study the difficulties 
of the operation. 

A section of the Mole is given on the plate opposite. ‘The outside of the 
Mole was formed by a vertical wall twenty-seven feet high. Inside the top 
of this wall was a parapet about four feet high with a walk running for the 
whole of its length. On the inside of this parapet was a sheer drop of 
fourteen feet on to the main Mole with only very occasionally a vertical 
iron ladder leading down. Four difficulties were at once apparent: the 
first was to place the ship with the landing party in close contact with the 
Mole ; secondly, to get the men up the twenty-seven foot wall which faced 
them ; thirdly, to get them down on to the Mole; and fourthly, on retire- 
ment, to allow them to climb the fourteen foot parapet and then down 
the seventeen foot wall on to the ship again. The plate shows how it was 
proposed to do this by bringing a monitor bow-on to the wall. It was 
useless to bring a ship alongside broadside on. Not only is it difficult to 
berth a ship quickly alongside a wall in a tideway, even with a party of 
men ashore to help with her ropes, but the swell which was certain to 
exist alongside, owing to the steaming of the vessels in the offing, would 


A te 


= 
vA 


wm UB: 


\ 


ing a section of the Mole ‘with the British monitor bows-on to it, the false 

being about to collapse; the brow is hinged over the parapet with the 

- end resting on the Mole. Three German destroyers are shewn in section, 
lying alongside each other on the inside of the Mole. 


Store House 


rs Viary a az a+ iar) 
Deets See pe, Mer ay lee 
= x as z 4 + = oh 
5 Retro pees . 4 ie aed 
4 - 7 ——? . a a 
Peek © *, *] 
-—~,» .. . 
ix PS 
eon 
eG re 
t 


— -_ 
— a a oe ee he Se 


Digitized by Google 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 215 


have made the use of landing-brows a practical impossibility. I devised, 
therefore, the following plan. A permanent landing-brow eighty feet 
long by ten feet wide and hinged at a point thirty-four feet from the 
inboard end and forty-six feet from the other end was to be built on to 
a turntable on the forecastle of a monitor. This brow was normally to 
be carried topped up in one straight line, and supported by a number of 
topping lifts, the multiplication of the topping lifts was necessary in case 
that one or more were destroyed by gun-fire.1_ When the monitor’s bow 
came against the wall the outer topping lifts were to be eased down and 
the landing-brow, hinging in the middle, allowed the shore end to rest 
on the breakwater. A complete switchback was thus provided for the 
men to run out of the monitor up a 30-degree slope and down a 40-degree 
stepped slope on to the breakwater. Having satisfied myself that the 
weights were not excessive, and that the general idea was feasible, details 
were considered. 

First and foremost was the problem of how to get a monitor into the 
required position. The difficulty I foresaw was that the engines might 
be stopped too soon and therefore a bad contact obtained, or they might 
be stopped too late and damage done to the brow which would risk the 
attempt being successful. I decided, therefore, to arrange for the monitor 
to ram the Mole at slow speed, and, for the purpose, to build on to the 
bow of the monitor a false casing of wood and steel, which would crush 
and act like a huge fender; but it was essential to construct it to crush 
downwards and not upwards so as not to jamb the brow.? The ship’s 
bower anchors were sufficient to hold up the bow against the tide which 
would be setting to the eastward, and a seven-ton anchor with two shackles 
of very heavy chain, tailed with ordinary bower cable, would be required 
to hold the stern. If, as was possible, the bow was held and caught where 
it struck the Mole instead of veering to the bow chain, and if at the same 
time the whole of the shackles were out with the stern anchor, the ship 
would only swing 30 degrees from the perpendicular to the wall; this 
would be amply allowed for by the movement afforded by the turn- 
table which was designed to allow the ship to take an angle of 70 degrees 
with brow. 

Let me repeat that the reasons for bringing the ship “‘ bow on” as before 
mentioned were these: one, to ensure good contact at once, and the 
other to keep the ship end-on to, and so unaffected by, any lop there might 
be, or to the destroyer wash, which experience had taught us was always 
set up and persisted for a distance of some miles from where these vessels 
were steaming. ‘This has been referred to in discussing the Ostend 
bombardment and the proposed landing on the coast. 

The main essentials which governed success were to land the men on 
the Mole in the quickest time possible. In an operation of this nature nine 


1 A topping-lift is a rope from a mast to support, or lift, the end of a spar, or 
platform, rigged out at an angle to the mast. 
* This false bow need not have extended below the water, so that the objection 
raised in the Official History of the War, Vol. V, does not hold good. 


216 'THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


hundred men, if landed at once, meant far fewer casualties than if driblets 
were thrown ashore. Success, therefore, depended absolutely on rapid 
landing and diverting the attention of the enemy away from the Mole. 
This led to deep consideration as to whether the Mole landing should be 
the first part of the programme, or whether a preliminary bombardment 
of the Knocke batteries should be undertaken, also whether airmen should 
bomb the Mole. ‘The main essential was that the landing should be 
rapidly carried out before any idea of the Mole being the objective could 
arise in the mind of the German officer responsible for defence. It was 
inconceivable that the approach of vessels should not become known 
ashore when they arrived within three miles of the coast. Surmise as to 
our objective would therefore arise somewhere about twenty minutes 
before contact with the Mole was effected. It was better to satisfy this 
surmise by a bombardment than to leave our objective open to conjecture. 
A bombardment of the Knocke batteries for a quarter of an hour before 
the attack would therefore assist, rather than prejudice the Mole landing. 

As to an air raid, bombing the Mole might drive the crews of the 
destroyers to shelter into the low level landing-places of the Mole, but 
it might also cause the boats to shove off, so I decided against bombing 
the Mole in favour of merely bombing the lock-gates as an auxiliary rough 
mark to assist in fixing the position of our ships. 

The first stage was therefore a bombardment of the Knocke batteries 
to foster an idea that a landing on that part of the coast was intended. 
The Germans were always very touchy about that portion of the fore- 
shore, since, if a successful landing did take place and Bruges were to be 
reached, the main line of retreat from the coast would have been cut. 
Such a landing was really quite impossible owing to the nature of the 
ground and the sea communication that subsequently would have to be 
kept up. However, as it was to them a sensitive spot, this part of the coast 
was chosen for bombardment to attract attention. 

A quarter of an hour after the start of the bombardment the first 
monitor would reach the Mole, letting go her stern anchor just before 
ramming, and dropping her bower-anchors at the moment of contact. 
The engines would have been kept slowly steaming ahead. The brow 
would be lowered at once, and the landing-party rushed ashore, dividing 
into three parties, each of three hundred men. The impetus of the men 
down the 40-degree slope would have been an asset in launching the attack. 
The first party was to go straight across and seize and sink with bombs 
the destroyers if they were still alongside the Mole; the second to turn 
to their left and take the guns at the end of the Mole; and the third to 
throw a defensive line across the breakwater from just beyond the coal- 
heap to the parapet, holding the sheds, and taking with them the half- 
filled sandbags for a temporary shelter. 

It was important that the monitor should not, if 1t could be prevented, 
come under fire from the Mole guns and the batteries to the westward 
of the root of the Mole. Smoke was the great security against this, but, 
to aid this end still further, a destroyer division was told off to engage 


LOW WATER 
Two of the many photographs taken of the Belgian coast from about 14,000 feet up in the air. 
By this method the slope of the beach was surveyed within an accuracy of six inches. 


PLATE XV 


at 1 a ee 
Digitized by *® 


CHART OF ZEEBRUGGE HARBOUR SHOWING THE PROPOSED POSITION OF 
THE TWO MONITORS FOR LANDING THE ATTACKING PARTY AND 
FIRING ON THE LOCK GATES 


PLATE: XVI 


Digitized by Google 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 217 


the Mole battery, if it was visible through the smoke. The tendency 
always is for human beings to shoot at the force which is shooting at them, 
unless they are specially warned not to do so. It was highly improbable 
that the High Command at Zeebrugge would have any inkling of the attack 
by monitors, and therefore it might confidently be assumed that no 
specific orders would have been issued to fire at them and not at the 
destroyers. If, when the monitors were observed steering into the break- 
water, they did not fire at the battery, they would probably, in turn, not 
be fired at in preference to the destroyers who were engaging the battery, 
as it would look as if the monitors had mistaken the entrance and would 
be wrecked on the Mole. 

Another, and almost the main feature of the operation was to fire at 
the lock-gates at short range. The Mole was only one mile from the 
gates. At such a range with 12-inch guns it was almost impossible to 
miss them even at night as the angle of descent of the projectile was only 
4 degrees, and the danger space afforded to a vertical target was conse- 
quently very great. I therefore arranged for a second monitor to go 
parallel to the Mole broadside on at the point shown G.C. in the plate, 
while the other rammed the Mole at J.M. G.C. signified General 
Craufurd and J.M. John Moore, the two selected for the work. I did 
not wish to risk the loss of the 15-inch monitors, although such risk was 
slight, and the other three 12-inch monitors were reserved for a special 
purpose in another proposed operation. (These were being fitted with 
18-inch guns for bombarding Bruges.) The John Moore was to carry 
the Admiral’s flag as I considered it highly desirable to be at the central 
position of the attack. 

If the gun-fire from the monitor succeeded, as was not improbable, in 
damaging both caisons then, at low tide, the canal would have been 
partially dried, the sun would have cracked the mud and caused leaks, 
the canal would have deteriorated and in a short time become useless. 
This would have produced results of a far more material nature than 
ineffective blocking, for Bruges would then have become useless as a 
submarine or destroyer base. 

There was no objection to taking the General Craufurd broadside on, 
since she would not have been required to make fast to or even touch the 
breakwater ; it would have shielded her from the shore batteries and given 
her a position to lie at of known range from the lock-gates, and probably 
her close proximity to it would have caused the tide to steady her and 
keep her pointing in one direction; this was an important point as, 
owing to the smoke-screen, it might have been difficult for her director 
officer to see the aiming mark out at sea. There was no intention of her 
landing men, she was to have no physical connection with the Mole, and, 
by being broadside on, would have ridden comfortably by her bower- 
anchor and without a stern anchor. It would not have mattered if she 
had rolled a little, in fact it would have been an assistance in firing her 
12-inch guns at the lock-gates ; nor would there have been any advantage 
in her making fast to the Mole as she only needed to get near enough to 


218 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


identify her position from her director tower. She would have had no 
brows nor any connection with the shore, and if she had not, in the first 
instance, hit off her exact position with the Mole she could before anchor- 
ing have moved along the Mole till she was in her right place. Her line 
of direction of fire would have been of some importance, so as to get the 
two lock-gates in line, for by so doing an “ over ’’ from the near lock-gate 
would have stood a chance of hitting the further one. Another advantage 
of using two ships would have been that, in the event of the monitors 
being fired at, the fire would have been divided between the two ships 
instead of being concentrated on one ship. 

To facilitate fixing the exact position of the firing ship so as to avoid 
delay in opening fire, a plan of the breakwater was prepared with every 
twenty yards marked and fixed by using prominent existing features, and 
the ranges and bearings of the lock-gates were calculated and tabulated 
from each of these twenty yard positions. The least elevation to clear 
the parapet with the projectile was 3 degrees, so that 5 degrees was selected 
as the least that could be safely used. The distance of the gates was exactly 
two thousand yards, but 5 degrees elevation with half charges would have 
given too long a range. Special charges were therefore ordered to give two 
thousand yards range at exactly 5 degrees elevation. For a similar reason 
special charges were ordered for the 6-inch gun to range the seaplane 
sheds and barracks and to keep a continuous fire on high-explosive shells 
on this portion of the Mole. 

It was easy to take a monitor nearly alongside and keep her there in the 
tide, but not so easy to ensure getting her off with a wind blowing on to 
the Mole. One destroyer was therefore detailed to anchor off the stern of 
the General Craufurd and, at once, to run out a 4-inch wire hawser ready 
to tow her bow off. The tide would have been on her port bow the 
moment she began to slue, and would have drifted her off. Towing the 
bow was therefore preferable to towing her stern off when the time arrived 
for her to leave. 

This scheme was submitted to the First Sea Lord, Sir John Jellicoe, 
on December 4th, and he generally approved it, but suggested combining 
with it a blocking operation. I pointed out that, of course, a blocking 
operation was a farce so far as sealing the port against the egress of 
destroyers and submarines was concerned, and that the destruction of 
the lock-gates by gun-fire, if accomplished, would be far more effective. 
But as Russia had gone to pieces and the Germans were in a position to 
withdraw their troops from their eastern frontier, and the Allies would 
have to stand on the defensive in 1918, the Army no longer objected to 
the blocking, and it would prove an exhilarating addition to the proposed 
exploit for the Patrol. At the same time it would inconvenience the enemy 
in case the gates were not destroyed by gun-fire. So at once the scheme 
was expanded to embrace blocking. It was evident that the seizing of 
the Mole would greatly facilitate the blocking operations. ‘The one and 
only matter that endangered the blocking was the possibility of the 
blocking ships being sunk by destroyers in the one-mile run from the end 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 219 


of the Mole to the canal entrance. The necessity for rapidly landing on 
the Mole and seizing the destroyers was, therefore, accentuated by the 
addition of the blocking part of the programme. 

To visualise the probable defensive measures in force at Zeebrugge it 
is necessary to place oneself in the position of the German naval authorities 
and consider the interests they had to defend and the possible attacks that 
might be made on them. The principle objective could only be (1) a 
landing on the coast ; (2) an attack on the craft lying alongside the Mole ; 
(3) a Mole landing; (4) an attack on the locks by torpedoes; (5) a 
blocking of the canal. 

Now for (2), (3), (4), and (5) there was one more or less unanswerable 
defence, namely to use the destroyers, that were usually lying alongside 
at night, to sink the attacking craft. If the boats cast off at once and lay 
between the canal and the Mole end they would be in a position to inter- 
cept any vessels making for the canal, or to torpedo any going alongside 
the inside of the breakwater ; gun-fire would be far less effective than direct 
torpedo attack. It was, moreover, the German custom at sea at night to 
use the torpedo in preference to the gun of attack. This defence was 
almost unanswerable. The main chance of our frustrating it lay in our 
landing quickly and boarding and sinking the destroyers at once with 
bombs. As a secondary measure, in case the destroyers had left before 
the landing party could board them, I arranged for the Fohn Moore to 
have howitzers mounted to her turret and fo’c’sle to drive the boats off 
the line between the Mole and the canal entrance and force them out of 
attacking distance. ‘This was possible as the water inshore of this line 
was shallow. 

Now, for a blocking to be successful, a fast speed was necessary for the 
ships to traverse the distance from the Mole head to the canal since it 
was to be expected that the flanking batteries ashore would be firing at 
them. Old cruisers were the only vessels sufficiently speedy and at the 
same time suitable as blocking ships. A smoke-screen was provided by 
the M.L.’s which had been well practised in this work for the great land- 
ing, and although those which had been temporarily lent to increase the 
numbers at Dover had returned to their ports they would soon brush up 
again. The dispositions of the M.L.’s and the details of their working 
were made out for all direction of any wind that allowed of the operation 
taking place, for, of course, the wind had to be blowing shoreward to 
drift in the smoke. Three charts were made for winds between WNW. 
and NNW., NNW. to NNE. and NNE. to ENE. To the westward of 
WNW. a good screen was impossible, as also was the case with winds 
much to the eastward of ENE. 

The smoke to be used was white phosphorus and chlor-sulphonic, 
which were far the best for the purpose. Phosphorus smoke was dense 
and persistent, and in the dark the burners glowed and lighted the whole 
length of the screen line and the low clouds, if there were any, with a dull 
red glare so that the attention of the enemy was attracted to a long line 
and distracted from the region immediately opposite the breakwater. 


220 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


With a NW. wind the general advance was towards the Mole end behind 
the screen. The monitors on arriving two miles from the Mole diverged 
from the blocking ships which remained in the offing. If the wind 
fell light or dropped, or even changed, which was possible inshore, as 
the land breeze might be making inshore, the smoke-boats ahead of the 
monitor were at once to proceed at full speed to two areas ahead close 
under the breakwater, trailing out their smoke as they went, which would 
flank the monitors and hide them, and the boats would be sheltered close 
under the high wall of the breakwater for the short time before the monitors 
arrived. At the same time, the trend of the smoke would be watched, and 
the smoke doused as necessary to leave the breakwater visible to the 
monitors as they approached close to it. The officers of these two sub- 
divisions would have been carefully selected, as cool judgment on their 
part might have been necessary in certain winds at a critical moment. 

As soon as the landing party were on the Mole, a bouquet of rockets 
would have been the signal for the blocking-ships to come in; but in any 
case they were to approach at full speed, not more than a quarter of an 
hour after the monitors were timed to be alongside. 

The position ashore now, would have been that the senior German officer 
had first been awakened by vague reports and had his attention drawn to 
the Knocke bombardment ; then to the gun attack by the destroyers on the 
Mole battery ; then it would have been distracted to the Mole landing ; 
so that he would be thoroughly confused as regards our real objective. 
A good chance, therefore, existed of the blocking-ships getting in sufh- 
ciently far so as not to be stopped, always supposing that the destroyers 
were not lying in wait for them. 

One point that requires further explanation is, how the ships were 
going to find the breakwater. About five miles NW. from the breakwater 
end was a German occulting light-buoy. This was a valuable guide 
af 1t was in its charted position, but it was never safe to trust to this. It was 
an obvious precaution on the part of the enemy occasionally to change 
Its position, and this they had already done on one occasion. Nor was a 
daylight “‘ fix ’’ to be relied on, as it might be shifted after dark. Our 
No. 8 buoy on the patrol line was a geographical position, and had been 
checked both from the Dutch and Flanders coast-marks. This would have 
been the kicking-off point for the Fleet. A destroyer with a taut-wire gear 
under Commander Fraser would at once have run in and fixed the light- 
buoy by course and distance ; and, if out of position, checked it by going 
in till he sighted the breakwater. One special M.L. would have again 
fixed the landing-spot before the monitor came in. An aeroplane would 
have dropped a flare as nearly as possible over the Mole battery, while 
others bombed the lock-gates these bursts would have given approximate 
positions. 

The above is a brief description of the operation as planned. ‘The broad 
details of how it was eventually carried out on St. George’s Day, 1918, 
can be gathered from the Official History of the War, Naval Operations, 
Volume V, and require comment, not in the light of knowledge after the 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 221 


event, but in the light of troubles foreseen, and how the original plan met 
these ; in fact, how experience, had it been applied to the scheme that was 
actually tried, would have modified the final results and avoided its develop- 
ing, as it did, into a Naval Balaclava. 

Let us compare the scheme I prepared with the one actually put into 
operation, and see how the results might have been modified had I 
remained in command to carry out my plan. 

First the Vindictive was used instead of a monitor to bring in the landing 
party. This was a mistake. The Admiralty offered her to me, but after 
mature consideration I decided not to accept her. Speed was not of the 
greatest importance if the smoke was properly worked ; and, even if the 
smoke-screen was only partially successful, the really dangerous time was 
when the ship had to reduce speed on approaching the Mole. The deck 
space of the Vindictive was not sufficient for a large number of men, they 
would be huddled together and form a compact target; no system of 
bursting screen protection could be arranged in her owing to her small 
beam ; and she was not convenient as a flagship. 

I had arranged to use only the starboard half of a monitor for the landing 
party, the outer plating on the port side formed a screen to burst the shells, 
and splinter-shields were to be erected on the port side of the main deck. 

The result of this departure from my plan was that no protection 
against shell-fire was provided for the landing party, and heavy casualties 
were incurred when approaching the Mole. The Offictal History of the 
War states that during this time Captain H. C. Halahan in charge of the 
seamen’s landing party, Lieutenant-Colonel B. H. Elliot the commanding 
officer of the Marines’ landing party, and Major A. A. Cordner, his second 
in command, were all dead ; and Commander P. H. Edwards, R.N.V.R., 
was severely wounded, and Lieutenant-Commander A. L. Harrison was 
struck down unconscious. ‘The casualties to the crew and material 
damage was equally serious. Too much reliance was placed on the 
efficacy of the smoke-screen, and the secondary protection which I had 
arranged was never adopted. Secondly, the Mole batteries were not 
seriously engaged. Instead of a division of destroyers attacking the battery 
with 4-inch guns, three little motor launches were sent to pass along the 
western side of the Mole and “ spray it with fire from their Stokes guns,”’ 
and two coastal motor boats were sent to attack the destroyers on the 
inside of the Mole.! Stokes guns were hardly of sufficient calibre seriously 
to engage the attention of the battery. 

Thirdly, a number of movable gangways were fitted instead of my hinged 
brow. These were more or less useless, since, at the best, they only landed 
the men on to the parapet, from this they had to drop fourteen feet on 
to the Mole, with only a couple of iron-rung ladders to help them down and 
back again. These gangways were mostly shot away or broken up by the 
Vindictive rolling (twelve out of fourteen according to Captain Karl 
Schultz), so that men could only be dribbled ashore over two narrow gang- 
ways. According to the same authority only fifty to sixty men were 

1 Offical History, Vol. V. page 254 


222 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


landed on the Mole itself. Fourthly, the fatal mistake of taking the Vin- 
dictive alongstde of the Mole instead of bows on prevented rapid contact 
being made with the Mole, and the necessary element of surprise 
ensured. 

The Official History states: “The extraordinary difficulty of getting a 
foothold in the breakwater was now patent. The east-going tidal stream, 
pressing against the Mole, made a sort of cushion of troubled water, which 
forced the ship back from the face of the masonry. With the helm to 
starboard her bows came in at once, but the brows would not then reach 
the parapet. With the helm to port she surged away from the Mole” 
. . . and so on. 

“Lieutenant H. G. Campbell, commanding officer of the Daffodil, 
brought help in these trying moments. As the Vindictive approached the 
Mole, he had steered his ship out on to her starboard beam, and now, 
as the Vindictive was labouring in the troubled water off the face of the 
Mole, he approached her bows on and pushed her into the Mole. These 
were his orders; but only a fine seaman could have manceuvred a ferry- 
boat with such wonderful precision at a moment of such confusion. A few 
minutes later Commander V. Gibbs brought Jris IJ alongside the Mole 
ahead of the Vindictive, and let go the starboard anchor.” 

In fact, the Vindictive, as I had foreseen, was unmanageable off the Mole 
owing to tide and swell. The whole Mole attack was given away by these 
delays, and the destroyer V 69 was able to man her guns and shoot down 
nearly everyone who penetrated the lower platform. The net result was that 
the German destroyers lying alongside without steam up were not taken or 
sunk, and the majority of the men who reached the Mole from the parapet 
never returned, because the wrong ship was selected and the wrong 
method of attacking the Mole adopted. 

I would never have sanctioned taking any ships alongside the Mole. 
As I have before remarked, experience had taught me there was bound to 
be a considerable sea alongside raised by our destroyers and other vessels 
steaming in the offing, and that it was certain to make even a monitor with 
bulges roll. This would be accentuated in the case of a small ship like the 
Vindictive, so that short gangways would be unworkable, a brow to go 
right up and over the parapet was a vital essential, the attack to be a success 
had to be: 

‘One great rush and one great cheer ” 


and not a dribble. In my orders I directed that if the large brow ahead 
of the monitor which I had arranged for in the original scheme, had been 
shot away, which, of course, was possible, though with the safeguards 
already mentioned it was not probable, the attack so far as the Mole was 
concerned was to be immediately abandoned, as it was useless attempting 
it when the essential feature which argued success was absent. Throwing, 
literally throwing, an avalanche of men ashore was the keynote of success. 
In short, the daring and fundamental part of my scheme was adopted, 
namely, the landing on the “ impossible ” outside of the Mole; but the 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 223 


details necessary to make it completely successful were altered or omitted 
through inexperience. 

The operations were carried out with the greatest pluck and heroism. 
The handling of the Vindictive was beyond all praise, the plucky example 
and persistence of her Captain will never die, and the successful handling 
of the blocking-ships is a glory to the Navy ; but, instead of the operation 
being a classical one for foresight and judgment, it failed, and failed in 
just the very particulars that experience of the coast would have predicted. 

The Official History dismisses the use of the hinged brow thus: 
‘To land the storming troops across one large brow, which might have 
been put out of action by a single shell, was to place the success or failure 
of the expedition at the mercy of a lucky shot from the enemy’s battery.”’ 

The point missed by the editor is that the short brows rigged from a 
ship rolling broadside on to the Mole were merely a death trap and made 
success an impossibility from the very start, and such a method should 
never have been attempted from the outside of the Mole. ‘The fourteen 
foot drop on to the Mole fatally handicapped speed of attack and made 
retreat impossible. 

The hinged brow at all events gave a good chance of success}; and if, 
at the worst, the brow had been shot away before being used the Mole 
landing would have been abandoned, hundreds of lives would not have 
been uselessly sacrificed and a disaster would have been avoided. We 
therefore find that the scheme as planned was from the start an im- 
possible one; this was amply proved by the fact that some six hundred 
casualties were incurred by our men, and the German loss was only ten 
killed and sixteen wounded. 

Now for the blocking. 'This was gallantly carried out; but as I had 
predicted, was an utterly useless operation. For, to quote again from the 
Official History, ‘‘ Previous to the operation about two submarines were 
entering or leaving the Flanders bases every day: during the week after 
the operation the figure was maintained ; for eleven Flanders submarines 
went to sea or returned between April 24th and the end of the month,” 
so that the net result of the whole Zeebrugge operation was : 


1. The Mole landing a failure, but a most gallant attempt. 
2. Blocking gallantly carried out, but useless. 


The total British casualties were 214 killed, 383 wounded, and 19 
_ prisoners. 

The German losses were 10 men killed, 16 men wounded. 

It is for these reasons that the Zeebrugge attack must be classical as a 
Naval Balaclava. 

One point remains. I had intended firing on the lock-gates ;_ which if 
hit, would have placed Bruges out of action as a submarine and destroyer 
base for some time. 

The Official History states that Admiral Keyes cut out this part of my 
programme because the caissons would have been opened as soon as the 
attack commenced. 


224 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


But why attack at high water ? 

If the attack had taken place after high water, when the water had fallen 
three feet, very little more inconvenience would have been caused to the 
landing party, and none at all if my brow had been used. 

Blocking could equally well have been carried out, but the outer caisson 
would have been shut, and most probably any attempt to open it would 
have resulted in its being hopelessly jammed by the water pressure for a 
sufficient length of time for the bombardment to have been effective. 

The use of a submarine loaded with explosives to blow up the jetty 
connecting the Mole with the shore was an admirable conception heroic- 
ally carried out. 

It is now necessary to hark back to the relations with the Admiralty 
over the plans. 

While adding the blocking scheme to the programme of the attack on 
the Mole, a document was received from the Admiralty, called a plan for 
blocking Zeebrugge. I returned it, pointing out that it was quite useless, 
lacking in every requisite for the success of such an operation, and saying 
that it had evidently been made out by officers without experience of the 
coast or the essentials of such operations; in fact, it was a ‘‘ compass, 
chart, parallel ruler plan,” and based on theory and not practical experi- 
ence. The one point which showed a streak of imagination was the 
blocking of the two ports Ostend and Zeebrugge on the same night. 
That was sound, if cruisers, and not merchant ships as was suggested, 
could be obtained in spite of the shortage. The remainder of the plan 
lacked all the elements of success. The attack was to be in daylight. This, 
of course, was lunacy. Slow merchant vessels were proposed ; this was 
quite out of the question; 16-knot ships at least were required. The 
Mole was left unattacked, and consequently the batteries and destroyers 
undisturbed. There was no suggestion of the bombardment.of the lock- 

ates. 
: In fact, the plan was exactly such a one as might have been expected 
from a committee sitting at the Admiralty with no experience of the 
Belgian coast. The blocking of Ostend, however, was a good point, and 
I proceeded to include this in my original scheme. Not that it was 
possible to block Ostend any more than Zeebrugge, but it added a finish 
to the operation, a really good, sound finish. 

The only difficulty which overshadowed the operations was to find the 
port, and this was a matter not to be lightly discounted. It should be 
appreciated that at one hour before high water, which was the proper time 
to block Ostend (not three hours after, which was approximately the 
time of the second actual attempt), the tide was setting in the offing at a 
variable and increasing speed to the eastward. The time of one hour before 
high water I therefore fixed so that the weak flood-tide and the east-going 
steam would tend to carry the stern of the ship across the channel after 
the bows had grounded. A most necessary precaution. With a “ bow- 
grounding,” it would be possible at dead slack tide with the east-going 
stream, to manceuvre the stern across the entrance, whereas without an 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 225 


east-going stream and with the slightest ebb it would be impossible to do 
this. ‘There was no lock-gate to be bombarded, so fall in height of tide was 
in this case of no account, and an hour before high water was the proper 
time for the attempt. 

The ships in approaching Ostend from the NW. or NE. had to cross the 
tide in the offing, the strength of which it was impossible to forecast. 
Now in our Great Landing arrangements the methods for fixing the posi- 
tion of the ships had received the utmost attention, and it may be remem- 
bered that we had arranged to use “ taut-wire gear” from P boats. 


< 4 
had 
ag. 
/¢ ix] Pi ene” 
Ms, 2 VF 
, 
an 2% -- i¥-- TK - 8:- a4 


ape ee 
ACE MINES , re 
,. . 


Hi A noe 
\ Suae 


Method of approaching Ostend behind a smoke-screen. 


This gave one method. ‘Two P boats were to leave the leading lights off 
Oost Dunkirk at a definite time, and steam 5000 yards off the coast, 
dropping an acetylene buoy with the light visible about 4000 yards dead 
in line with the entrance to Ostend ; but this in itself was not good enough, 
an accident might happen to the buoys, such, for instance, as being 
attacked by a German patrol. 

A second system was therefore elaborated. It consisted in dropping the 
light-buoys from P boats astern of the blocking-ships ; each boat had a 
qualified navigating officer and a special compass, and each buoy in suc- 
cession was to be dropped on an exact compass bearing from the last one 

P 


Digitized » Google 


226 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


laid. These are shown in the above diagram. By this means a compass- 
line-of-bearing astern of “‘ buoys in line ” was fixed for the ships with some 
degree of accuracy, free from all considerations of tide and smoke. 

As soon as the taut-wire light-buoy had been placed an M.L. was to 
go in and find the entrance, and be ready to signal to the incoming vessels. 
The above, together with the ships’ own reckoning, provided four checks 
on the course in. Aircraft dropping flares provided a fifth. 

In the first attempt these precautions were neglected and a German 
light-buoy relied on, with the result that the harbour was never found. 
At the second attempt, ten days or so later, the tide was ebbing, under 
which condition blocking was practically impossible. The time fixed 
was one hour after high tide. Delays extended this considerably. If the 
harbour could not have been entered by midnight, the attempt should 
have been postponed. Between 1 a.m. and 2 a.m. the tide fell three feet 
in the harbour. It is only fair to the Vindictive’s officers to point out that 
the time of blocking made the success of the attempt impossible. At 
the time of the second attempt the enemy would be sure to be on the alert, 
and would know what to expect, and would not improbably have been ready 
to assist the ebb-tide with the water from the Bassin de Chasse, which 
is a large reservoir filled at high water and used at low water in the absence 
of a river, to sluice out the entrance of a harbour to keep it clear of mud. 

Yet when the attempt to block Ostend was first made the precaution of 
checking the position of the Stroom Bank buoy was neglected. In the 
memorandum I sent to Admiral Keyes after leaving the command quoted 
on page 227, I said with regard to the Zeebrugge attack: ‘‘ The chief 
difficulty is hitting off the exact spot ; several checks will be required . . . 
this necessitates having fixed the occulting light-buoy shortly before. 
The Hun may move it slightly ; watch this and above all fix it by a 
method which does not attract attention.” Yet this was never done. The 
Germans moved the light-buoy off Ostend a mile out of its position! and 
the block-ships ran ashore instead of making the harbour. Just fancy 
the disgrace of the British Navy being taken in by such a booby trap ! 

The capture of a coastal motor boat during the first abortive attempt on 
Ostend placed her orders in the hands of the enemy. These, together with 
the placing of mark-buoys off the harbours, awoke suspicion in the minds 
of the Germans and caused them to strengthen their defences.? 

The Official History states that the Germans thus captured “ papers 
and diagrams which showed that a blocking operation had been planned 
against Ostend and gave them a good deal of knowledge about the practical 
details of its execution.” 

Captain Schultz continued: “ The plans of operations found in the 
boat caused the commander of the Marine corps on April 12th, 1918, to 
order the whole coast into a constant state of readiness, On April 14th 
the batteries east of Ostend were bombarded by the enemy with several 
shots and in addition netly laid British buoys in the outer approaches of the 

Harbour indicated further enemy plans of assault.” 

4 Naval Operations, Vol. V, page 264. * Lecture by Captain Karl Schultz. 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 227 


It was asking for defeat to issue such papers to all the small craft ! 
Each vessel should only have been given orders as to its own movements 
with no mention of the general scope of the operations ; any subsidiary 
information should have been communicated verbally. To issue plans 
of the operation to small craft was to repeat the fatal mistake made by the 
French at the Chemin des Dames, and of which I had made a mental 
note. Again the placing of buoys in the offing was a fatal and at the same 
time an utterly unnecessary act. I always elaborated my plans so as to 
avoid the necessity of placing any buoy near the future scene of operations, 
and never permitted any vessel to approach such an area before the 
operation took place. 

All this of course was merely asking for trouble. 

Experience is a thing so subtle and unobtrusive that it is often little 
appreciated by those who have the ruling of affairs, yet it is the paramount 
factor in planning all operations. 

It is impossible to have a better example of how want of experience 
wrecked the two schemes. Gallantry, zeal, energy, all were present to the 
uttermost, from the Admiral to the First-Class boy, but experience was 
lacking. Instead of the blocking of Zeebrugge and Ostend, the last Naval 
operations of the War, being models, classical models, the Mole landing 
was a modern Balaclava, a disaster ; and Ostend, after our having patrolled 
close to it for nearly three years, was not found on the only occasion when 
it was really necessary ; and all through want of experience. 

In giving his provisional approval to the Zeebrugge scheme as I had 
planned it towards the close of 1917, Sir John Jellicoe, the First Sea Lord, 
desired me to explain its details to the Operations Committee. On Tues- 
day, December 18th, 1917, I therefore went to the Admiralty, and met 
him, Admiral Sir Henry Oliver, Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff, Vice- 
Admiral Sir Rosslyn Wemyss, Rear-Admiral Roger Keyes, President of 
the Operations Committee, and other members, and explained fully to 
them my proposals, and obtained the final approval of the First Sea Lord. 

Sir John Jellicoe, however, wished me to explain the scheme to the Sea 
Lords, as the Admiralty would be implicated. Accordingly on December 
2gth I attended the Admiralty to do so, but on arrival I was told by the 
First Lord, Sir Eric Geddes, that I was superseded in my command, so 
that no further action on my part was necessary. At the same time Rear- 
Admiral Keyes was given the Dover Command. 

Although I had explained the whole scheme fully to him as President 
of the Operations Committee, so impressed was I with the necessity for 
attention to certain points that, knowing he had had no experience of 
operations off the Belgian coast, at the risk of seeming interfering I 
wrote him the following notes after leaving. 

** The chief difficulty is hitting off the exact spot. Several checks will be 
required—taut-wire gear—but the difficulty lies in running this across 
the tide. The position from the occulting-light-buoy can be fixed by 
this method en passant : this necessitates having fixed the occulting-light- 
buoy shortly before. The Hun may move it slightly; watch this, and 


228 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


above all fix it by a method which does not attract attention. Leave no 
detail to chance. Kite-balloon towed by a destroyer may be useful to 
see over the smoke. Flares dropped from aeroplanes will be a rough 
guide. Navigating in by dropping moored light-buoys from surveying 
P boats astern of leader. Leader should form a column with nothing 
astern of her. Charges should be special; those for lock-gates, so that 
5 degrees of elevation gives 2000 yards range. Present special charge 
will do for sea-plane base. Six inch require special charges also. Think 
out thoroughly pros and cons of searchlights and flares and when and 
where to use them. I consider the landing best arranged by holding a 
defensive line just to the west of the two eastern large sheds. Only let 
raiding party go beyond this to sink dredger otherwise they will hamper 
the use of heavy gun-fire. The use of the defensive line is to cut off the 
port from the Mole, and machine-guns with good bullet-proof shield 
will be required and sandbags for protection from bombs. The line should 
include the coal dump. Speed of jumping is everything. Use great 
discretion as to when you commence smoke. Wind, speed, direction, 
distance from Mole govern this. Remember it will take five minutes to 
form a screen. Everything depends on hiding the main operation. Have 
a destroyer diversion, therefore, to give a false idea. For the same reason 
fire at the batteries that do not infilade the main attack. In any case you 
will not hit them, so give a false impression by firing at the wrong ones. 
Give the idea that the attack is to the eastward of the Mole. As regards 
control of fire, I have my own views, which I would have carried out, but 
your gunnery experts are sure to differ, and you had better follow their 
cast-iron methods. There are, of course, hundreds of points. Spend three 
hours daily, separate hours preferably, going through the operation, 
step by step, varying points of first alarm, different winds and smoke 
casualties, and put yourself in the place of the Bosche, and see how you 
would counter if you guessed the attack, and also if you had to change 
from one counter to another, and their difficulties. This will strengthen 
your attack, and at the same time give you a better idea while the show 
is in progress what is in the Bosche’s mind.” 

I then went on to deal with the Bruges bombardment, which never took 

lace. 

. It has been suggested that the attack I proposed was too complicated, 
involving too many actions. Very slight consideration will show that this 
was not so. It is a guiding principle when planning operations that 
complications which affect the main purpose should, as far as possible, be 
avoided. The success of the main operation should depend as little as 
possible on the synchronisation and success of subsidiary and auxiliary 
attacks. But there is no objection to the inclusion in the plan of attack 
of any number of subsidiary operations which, if unsuccessful, do not in 
any way affect the main attempt. 

Bearing this in mind when considering my plan, we will see that the 
blocking, the firing at the lock-gates, and the landing on the Mole formed 
three separate operations. None of which were interdependent. Any 


MONITORS BOMBARDING OSTEND FROM BEHIND A SMOKE SCREEN MADE 
BY THE MOTOR LAUNCHES 


The monitors, which were 6000-ton ships, can be seen, and their size is the measure of the extent 
of the screen. The puff of black cordite smoke showing above the screen betrayed their 
position, so a mixture of black and white smoke was subsequently used. 


PLatTE XVII 


TIAX dlvid 
‘AIvJoLIVS “G') ‘NSV') MALIVAA YALSVWAVd-LaaTA 
. * . e ue aac ae = o *. , y , 
‘LAAN ]-OV1Y “VIVAINGY AHL ‘“YeIs aqi Jo yoryy “O'S ‘ONTMOG ATUAdH NIVLdV) 


‘YS’ NVOMON “A "7 3 
SJAVLIS SIH ANV ‘TWHINGV AHL 


* i 


i>. 
‘©. 


ed, 
bd 


A 


Md 
ea 


~~ 


"PPPS AR EO LILES A 
pe = 


mee 


rae 7. 


PLANS FOR BLOCKING OSTEND AND ZEEBRUGGE 229 


single one or any two might fail without affecting the third. No complica- 
tion was caused by having three instead of one single attack. The only 
interdependence was that of the smoke-screen with each and all of the 
three. It is doubtful which of the three could be looked on as the main 
objective. Without doubt the firing on the lock-gates promised to give 
the most permanent benefit. The attack on the Mole held out a good 
chance of destroying the seaplane base and the Mole battery and sinking 
the destroyers. Blocking was practically useless, but would have pleased 
the Admiralty and given free scope to imaginative writings on the part 
of the Press, and, as it turned out, thus cheer up the nation. But whatever 
the result might be all three were separate operations and no one 
complicated the remainder. 

In conclusion, instead of the posts of honour in the blocking-ships 
being given to officers of the Dover Patrol, who in foul weather and fine, 
through disappointments without number, had borne the burden of 
three years of hard work, they were all given to officers outside the Patrol. 
There were officers in the Patrol just as gallant as those who were selected 
from outside. I cannot say more gallant, as nothing could excel the 
devotion with which they carried out their work. But to me the most 
bitter results of the undertaking were the loss of the gallant Halahan, an 
officer who had served under me for nearly three years and for whom I had 
the very greatest regard, and the exclusion of the officers of the Patrol from 
the posts of honour in the very operation that had been largely planned with 
the view of recompensing them for their great services and unadvertised 
work for three years in the Dover Patrol. 

Many readers of this chapter may perhaps question the utility of 
discussing the failure of the attack on the Mole, and in all probability 
their first thought may be that it would have been better to let the matter 
rest with the halo of success crowning the attempt. After due considera- 
tion I do not agree with this view, since it is useless deliberately to discard 
the bitter lessons taught by experience. To do so is merely to court 
greater disasters in future wars. If ever again we are at war, I hope the 
memory evoked by the word “‘ Zeebrugge”’ may bring home to the Board 
of Admiralty the fact that appointments or change of appointments to 
commands on the eve of operations will most probably involve the failure 
of our arms, and govern the destinies and lives of those who serve in the 
lower grades and ranks. They may then be forced to halt and ponder 
on the question ; ‘‘ Can man merely by appointment suddenly experience 
gain?” 


POSTSCRIPT 


As already stated, in 1917 I warned the Admiralty that it was impossible 
to block Ostend and Zeebrugge against the passage of submarines. After 
the Zeebrugge and Ostend operation of 1918 the new Admiralty issued 
statements to the effect that the harbours had been blocked. This 
apparent discrepancy requires analysis and elucidation. 


230 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The Official History of the War, Naval Operations, Vol. V, is forced 
to make two admissions : 

(1) That the attacks on Zeebrugge and Ostend both failed with a large 
loss of life. 

(2) That the incorrect information issued to the Nation by the Admiralty 
was responsible for the elation of the population and the halo which has 
surrounded this unfortunate operation. 

The Zeebrugge operation and the first attempt on Ostend took place 
on the night of April 22nd-23rd. 

On page 274 we read: ‘‘ During the 24th (that ts on the following day) 
three submarines left by way of Ostend ; and, on the following day UB 16 
went to sea past the block-ships at Zeebrugge.1 On the 27th entries and 
exits were made partly by Zeebrugge and partly by Ostend, after which 
the average number of sailings and arrivals was maintained.”’ 

In fact, the block-ships were as useless as if they had remained in England. 

On page 274, after a description of the second abortive attempt on 
Ostend, we read: “‘. . . but to the public they (the Admiralty) issued a 
far more encouraging report ; for at 10.45 (May roth) the Assistant Chief 
Censor made the following announcement to the Press, ‘* The operation 
designed to close the ports of Ostend and Zeebrugge was successfully 
completed last night when the obsolete cruiser Vindictive was sunk between 
the piers and across the entrance to Ostend harbour.”’ 

We therefore find that at least ten days after the Admiralty must 
have known that Zeebrugge was not blocked, without waiting for a report 
from the Admiral in Command which would have informed them that 
Ostend was not closed, they issued a report stating that the blocking of 
Ostend and Zeebrugge was successfully completed.’’ 

On page 276 we reach the historian’s peroration. 

“The blocking expeditions were executed during weeks of intense 
national anxiety, for it was during those weeks that the British armies 
were yielding one position after another before an onslaught that seemed 
irresistible. When anxiety was keenest, the Nation was suddenly informed 
that a Naval force had twice entered positions deemed impregnable and 
had blocked two fortified harbours.” 

On page 277: ‘“‘ The feeling aroused (by this incorrect information) 
was not merely British pride in a British triumph, it spread like fire from 
country to country, from continent to continent, etc. etc... .” 

We wonder how far the fire would have spread had the frigid truth been 
told. The Country, after the cold douche of the pedantically correct 
official statement issued after the battle of Jutland, was prepared to believe 
literally any report issued by the Admiralty. They therefore unreservedly 
gave credence to the inaccurate statements issued re the Zeebrugge and 
Ostend operations. ‘The whole truth was, that nothing material had been 
achieved, but hundreds of valuable lives had been sacrificed by departing 
from my plans of attack ; and, on the first attempt, Ostend had been, so to 
speak, mislaid and could not be found by the blocking-ships, and on the 
second attempt the block-ship was never even placed across the Channel. 


4 Italics not in original. 


ZEEBRUGGE 


Dark frowned the Mole, forbidding reared its wall, 
Onward the ships brought in that gallant band. 
Shell-scorched in death, in agony they fall 

Who only thought of fighting hand to hand. 


When the brave few sore thinned by those who fell, 
Had scaled the top and forward forced their way, 
They faced an abyss leading to a Hell, 

Prepared through warnings given by delay. 


Valour demanded dropping twice their height, 
With feeble chance of scaling back again, 

Few had arrived to mingle in that fight 

Those few, so few that valour died in vain. 


High on the Mole a monument is reared, 
Recording the prized valour of that band, 
Of heroes who there died and never feared, 
Obeying without question that command. 


Sleep on, brave souls, shrouded in glory bought 
By your great courage, you died not in vain, 
The purpose of your strivings now is naught, 
The lessons gained eternally remain. 


231 


CHAPTER XIII 
DUNKIRK AND DOVER 


The Naval command on the French coast—Admiral Favareau—Admiral de 
Marliave—Admiral Ronarc’>h—Dunkirk—General Rouquerol—The British 
mission at La Panne—Value of the work done by the French destroyers and 
torpedo-boats—The R.N. siege guns—Their work—Dover—The harbour— 
The Superintendents—Engineering work—The military command—The 
question of control of shore defences of a Naval base—Reason which led to 
control being military—Salvage work—The shore work of the ladies—The 
visit of H.M. The King to Dover—The good work of the Mayor and Corpora- 
tion. 


P to the end of 1915 the command of the vessels of the French 

Navy was entirely vested in the Admiral commanding the north 

coast of France, whose headquarters were at Cherbourg. Vice- 
Admiral Favareau held this command, and our relations were most 
cordial. At the end of 1915 it was decided to place all the vessels operating 
in the eastern part of the Channel under the British senior naval officer. 
Rear-Admiral de Marliave was appointed as senior naval officer on the 
French coast, and it would have been difficult to find a more accomplished 
naval officer or one more charming to work with. An early conference 
was held at Dover when the general lines on which we were to work were 
arranged. These differed little from those already in existence. 

Admiral de Marliave, of course, retained all the administrative functions 
of his command; it merely fell to my lot to arrange the disposition of 
available vessels, but here again obviously such dispositions were made 
with the concurrence of the French Admiral. Matters of this sort are 
easily adjusted when both sides have solely in view the successful prose- 
cution of the War. It was my business to make myself acquainted with 
the ideas of the French Navy and to recognise the French point of view, 
and to adjust the use of their vessels, having those considerations in mind. 
On the other hand, the French Rear-Admiral, sinking all prejudices, 
loyally supported me, and gave me the full advantage of his valuable 
opinions on the particular situations as they arose. 

The questions of trade routes, mine-sweeping, and drift-nets all came 
under review, and although in such matters I considered that the French 
senior naval officer should have sole control on his own coast, subject to 
the general policy of the area, he elected to send his officers to Dover to 
study our methods and appliances. He took the broad-minded view that, 
with our large coast traffic, we had better opportunities of gaining experi- 
ence than a more limited traffic on the French side had afforded to those 


232 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 233 


under his orders. The result was most happy, since the systems on both 
sides were broadly unified, while the greatest goodwill and understanding 
prevailed. 

In the beginning of May 1916 Admiral de Marliave was appointed to 
a command in the Mediterranean, and Vice-Admiral Ronarc’h took over 
the Naval command in the sphere of the northern armies of France. It 
was with many regrets that we said good-bye toa courtly gentleman and 
a gallant naval officer. 

Admiral Ronarc’h was the hero of Dixmude, having commanded the 
Naval Brigade in 1914 during the German advance into Belgium. His 
stand at Dixmude helped materially to check the advancing wave. It 
was not until the troops on his flank fell back that his gallant force was 
obliged to yield ground ; but, even then, it fought inch by inch till the 
‘remnant had to swim the canal under the close fire of the enemy. I look 
back on my cordial relations with Admiral Ronarc’h as one of the brightest 
spots in a somewhat uphill and arduous command. He possessed great 
experience and shrewdness, yet he was always ready to enter into the 
spirit of a new adventure. Our “‘ potager,’’ as we called the barrage mine- 
field, was a source of interest and amusement. The details of the great 
landing and the Zeebrugge Mole landing were all discussed with him, 
and always with advantage. He was ever ready to smooth a local irrita- 
tion and help our vessels as fully as his own. Fortunately he remained 
in command during the remainder of the War. The French Admiralty 
wisely recognised the value experience gave to their officers in their high 
command. 

Dunkirk was the headquarters both of the French and British Naval 
forces on our Ally’s coast ; a town of a hundred memories, to which three 
years of assault by gun-fire and aircraft were added during the War. It 
would have been a good object-lesson if some of our municipal dignitaries, 
who shouted if they were scratched, could have been sent to pass a night 
in Dunkirk during the winters of 1916—17. 

Plate XIX fully shows the martyrdom of this town from bombs and 
shell. Of course many towns suffered more. Some, such as Ypres, Nieuport, 
and Armentiéres, were most severely handled, but Dunkirk could not, like 
these, be deserted. The unloading of ships and the provisioning of the 
armies had to continue, therefore the civil population had to stick to their 
posts. They suffered as many as five raids in a single night, and a total 
of 214 bombardments by air and sea. Seven thousand five hundred and 
fourteen bombs and projectiles were thrown into the town, 233 persons 
being killed and 336 wounded. 

The comparatively few casualties were accounted for by the universal 
use of cellars and shelters during the raids, which meant security at the 
expense of comfort. A remarkable thing for some people in England to 
ponder over is that the inhabitants never complained. They recognised 
that they were at war, and that, as their geographical position was the 
vatson d’étre of their fortune in peace time, they had to put up with the 
consequent disadvantage in war. Voild tout! Rightly the town was 


234. THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


awarded the Croix de Guerre. I asked for it to be given the D.S.C., but 
this was not accorded until some time afterwards. 

Now Dunkirk was an enormous asset to us, but a very long way from 
being perfect. It was the fashion to grumble at Dover as a harbour, and 
truly that place was not pleasant in a gale; but there was room there for 
a considerable number of vessels, while Dunkirk was much more cramped. 
The French gave us all the space they possibly could, and we did not do 
so badly; but there was only berthing space for three 12-inch monitors 
and a few trawlers alongside the main tidal jetty. 

In October 1915 our establishment at Dunkirk had so greatly developed 
that I asked the Admiralty to appoint a Commodore as local Senior Naval 
Officer. Captain Charles Johnson, D.S.O., the ‘“‘ Captain D’”’ of the 
Sixth Flotilla, was appointed, and most ably carried out the duties. Later 
on in 1917, owing to a breakdown in health, this officer was succeeded 
by Captain Hubert Lynes, D.S.O., who continued with ability the good 
work of his predecessor. The local D.N.T.O.’s were in succession 
Captain Maresceaux, Captain Benwell, and Captain Hamilton, and these 
officers, with the exception of the first, who acted as Senior Naval Officer 
before the Commodore was appointed, were almost entirely occupied with 
transport duties. 

I have already mentioned the difficulties associated with the protection 
of the left flank of the Allied Armies. What a chance the Germans had 
of inflicting a master blow and practically taking the whole coast, or at 
all events that portion which reached up to and included Dunkirk! The 
only difficulty lay in the design of suitable craft ; but this was by no means 
insuperable. Consider the issue at stake. The scheme already outlined 
would have been to throw sixty thousand men on the beach between Oost 
Dunkirk and Coxyde (see Chart of the Patrol). The beach was very much 
the same in general characteristics as that portion which we selected for 
our landing between Westende and Middelkerke. To land successfully 
the boats should not have drawn more water than two feet six inches ; 
their beam being limited by the breadth of the lock-gates of the canal, 
say sixteen feet. A speed of five knots only would have been required, 
and a boat about one hundred and twenty feet long should have sufficed, 
rather like a giant elongated long punt. Of course absolutely smooth 
water would have been essential to success. But modern naval con- 
structive genius should have enabled a suitable design to be produced. 
If necessary, boats could have been transported along the canals in sec- 
wu should any of the locks not have admitted of the full length of the 
craft. 

The boats would have been deserted after landing, their functions 
being ended. Their construction, therefore, might have been of the 
lightest possible nature since damage on grounding was immaterial. A 
broad front would have been available for the landing. The lines at Nieu- 
port would have been taken in reverse and pinched through and land 
communication with the main Army would have been established. 
Against such a landing in early 1916 no real defence existed. I brought 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 235 


the danger to the notice of G.H.Q. in France, and the Admiralty, since 
I recognised that I had far too small a force available to stop such a project. 
I might attack and damage the enemy while he was making the attempt, 
but anything approaching destruction was quite out of the question. 
I also visited Amiens and represented the matter to General Foch, who 
commanded the Northern Armies, and by his direction the trenches 
facing the sea had the sand removed from them, additional guns were 
mounted, and, what was more important, machine-guns were placed in 
the Dunes. What were the chances of success of such an attack? Per- 
sonally I think they were very great. A raid on the Channel and the Downs, 
if made simultaneously in force, would probably have necessitated moving 
our destroyers from Dunkirk to the Channel; a pitch-dark night would 
have hidden the advancing boats, and quite a light smoke-screen would 
have made them invisible in the light of star-shells. They might easily 
have got to within half to three-quarters of a mile from the shore without 
being seen. Then about ten minutes only would have remained wherein 
to take steps to repel the attack. ‘The boats would have kept their motors 
running right up to the time they bumped on the beach, and the Dunes 
would have been seized just as daylight broke. 

In General Rouquerol, who commanded the division of French troops 
on the coast, I had a firm friend and delightful colleague. Our work 
together was absolutely harmonious, and he was always ready to help us 
by providing gun positions for our heavy guns, or in any other way he 
could. The naval siege-guns under Captain Halahan worked directly 
under his Chef d’Artillerie, Colonel Barbier. The larger guns, the long 
12-inch and 9.2’s, being mounted specially for the coast advance, I kept 
under my own orders, although the officers in command had orders to 
comply with any request made by the French General, and the latter had 
free use of the whole armament in cases of emergency. The Generals 
successively commanding the Army on the coast were: General Hely 
d’Oisel, General Mondesir, and General Balfourier, and with all of them 
our relations were most cordial. 

The British Mission to the Belgian Headquarters at La Panne was also 
of greatest assistance to us. The first Chief was Major-General Tom 
Bridges, C.B., of St. Quentin fame, who was afterwards succeeded by 
Prince Alexander of Teck, subsequently created Earl of Athlone. This 
link with the Belgian and French Armies was most valuable. In fact, 
the mission at La Panne became the centre of communication between 
the Navy and the armies on the coast, and I owe a great debt to these two 
officers for the assistance afforded and the sometimes delicate negotiations 
carried through by them. 

I cannot refrain from expressing my respectful regard for Their Majes- 
ties the King and Queen of the Belgians. The attitude of the King has 
been one of admiration to the Allies, and to all nations who appreciate 
honourable conduct. May I suggest that Her Majesty deserves equal 
recognition ? The King, no mean engineer and yachtsman, always took 
a lively personal interest in the doings of the Navy, and the Queen I 


236 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


always maintain is the very best lady sailor in Europe. It was to them a 
holiday from the anxieties of the War to come occasionally on board a 
British man-of-war, and at times, unfortunately few, to cross the Channel 
in a destroyer for the purpose of taking their sons and daughter to or from 
their schools in England. Nothing pleased the Queen more than it should 
happen to be blowing. On the bridge or, if the sea permitted it, on the 
fo’c’sle swept by the wind and washed by the spray she thoroughly 
revelled in the motion of the vessel. If the Belgians had a Navy it would 
idolise their Queen. 

The King also enjoyed the trips. Never during the War did either of 
them live anywhere but on Belgian soil. When, during the 1917 offensive, 
La Panne became quite unsafe, they moved to a ch&teau a little farther 
south, but no farther from the lines than La Panne. It was one of our 
great pleasures, when work permitted, for our ships to have the honour 
of a visit from their Majesties. 

I always had a latent fear of the King being kidnapped. Fourteen miles 
only from Ostend a sandy beach, three fast motor launches, a special 
beaching boat, some three or four soldiers only on guard at the palace 
which faced the beach and open sea, formed a combination that might 
have tempted an enterprising German to make the attempt. 

At all events it was one of those coups which might have come off and 
was well worth a trial, if only to say it had been done. 

The work done by the French vessels was beyond all praise. The 
French Admiralty was unable to detach a large force for work in the 
eastern Channel, About six or eight small destroyers, really torpedo- 
boats, and four large destroyers constituted the fighting force, in addition 
Dunkirk, Calais, and Boulogne were provided with local craft for mine- 
sweeping and trade regulation. Of the large destroyers, as a matter of 
fact, only two were usually available owing to repairs and refits; these 
worked with our vessels on the patrol line and very soon became accus- 
tomed to our methods of manceuvring and signalling. These vessels were 
of great assistance in increasing the number of our Belgian coast patrol, 
a very valuable addition to our small force, On October 27th, 1917, the 
destroyers Capitaine Mehl and Magon joined with the Botha and Mentor 
in an engagement with three large German destroyers and had five 
wounded by a shell, The enemy were hit and retired under their 
batteries. 

On the smaller boats fell the brunt of light vidette work in the waters 
to the eastward of Dunkirk. A constant patrol at night was maintained 
by them in the West Deep throughout the War. This was our nearest 
patrol to the enemy’s ports. While on this work the Etandard was tor- 
pedoed and all her crew drowned, and the Notre Dame de Lourdes was 
badly damaged by gun-fire but taken safely to Dunkirk. 

Another action in the West Deep took place between the enemy’s boats 
and the Capitaine Mehl, commanded by Capitaine de Frégate Guy; the 
Bouclier, Commandant Bigot; the Magon, Commandant Thouroude ; 
and Enseign Roux, Commandant Mouget. ‘The Captain of the Boucher 


re *«¢ € : 
wa ae 2 ee 
\ 2, ee Bees (Seo Bip ee 
wen oe ¥ Sey os |! ee ee ree: ee 
\ ++ Lay ETEN e, Pee 
oe , 
oe es a hoe ae 
r] y . oi Rat 4 


. ‘ 
7 Pet ge 


ton 


a4 
UA, 


\Weern a Ys 
5 Be 
v 
" 


A PLAN OF DUNKIRK SHOWING THE BOMBS AND SHELLS DROPPED 
INTO THE TOWN 


Prate XIX 


Digitized by Google 


te - ; ? . Lp ~ ' SS bs. . * «= 
Re dee pie tS = 
a ll Aap’ rx oa aw, : 


= Ag eS :. 
—_ ae Ad ple, 


Ses 5» = 
4 e; 


INSPECTION OF THE R.N. ATR FORCE AF DUNKIRK BY H.M. KING GEORGI V 
Plate XX 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 237 


and Enseign de Vaisseau de Curzon and eight of the crew of that vessel 
were killed, and Enseign de Vaisseau Peyronnet and ten others were 
wounded. This was one of those quick, sharp night encounters in which 
it was impossible to estimate the damage done to the enemy. 

In August 1915 an enemy’s destroyer was sunk by the Oriflamme and the 
Branlebas off Westende. ‘The latter destroyer struck a mine off the 
Nieuport buoy on October sth the same year. The Aventurier engaged 
the German destroyers, together with our coast patrol, on June 8th, and 
had three men wounded. On October 19th, 1917, a seaplane dropped a 
bomb on Torpedo-boat 321, which exploded a lance-bomb on board that 
vessel, doing considerable damage. 

These were some of the local encounters which took place, but there 
were other incidents. The boats in the West Deep on several occasions 
afforded help to our seaplanes when in trouble. 

The visit of H.M. the King to the coast was an event to be recorded as 
the air stations, monitors, and siege-guns were inspected by him. Plate 
XX shows the King in conversation with certain of the pilots of the 
R.N.A.S. who had just returned from the Somme after strenuous work 
with the Army. The inspection will always be remembered by the officers 
and men of the Dover Patrol who were then at Dunkirk. 

The work of the R.N. siege-guns deserves a brief review. Their crews 
were originally landed by Rear-Admiral Hood as soon as the Germans 
had been checked at Nieuport ; the battery then consisted of two 6-inch 
guns and one g:2 gun on a railway mounting. Captain H. Halahan was 
in command. Lieutenant Shoppee and Lieutenant Tower were the 
observing officers. ‘The main observing stations were situated in Nieuport 
town and Ramscapelle. The one at Nieuport started as a fine square 
building with stone steps inside it, it was gradually demolished, Lieutenant 
Shoppee moving down as it was reduced in height until the stone steps 
were ruined. Then a rocket and line enabled a ladder to be pulled up, 
and the post continued to be used right up to the end of the War. A 
second observation-post was started in Nieuport, where a concrete tower 
was built inside a sand dune commonly known as Duncan’s tower after 
the Canadian sergeant who constructed it. Another observation station 
was at Ramscapelle, which could only be approached in the dark. 

In 1916 I landed the four g:2-inch guns from the monitors. Three 
were landed first, one of which was placed in a concrete casemate, the other 
two were placed in the open until emplacements could be built. The 
emplacements were called the Barrington and Eastney. 

Towards the end of October 1916 the sector was stirred into unusual 
activity by the arrival of a detachment of our Royal Engineers, who 
came to try the effects of a new gas on an unexpecting part of the German 
lines. ‘The enemy retaliated by a bombardment of gas-shells within 
a few days of our attack, and from that date the sector never resumed its 
quiet aspect, but got more and more active until our own troops took over 
that part of the line in June of the following year. The increased liveliness 
just mentioned soon made it obvious that guns in the open as near to the 


238 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


enemy’s lines as ours were placed were no good for the stationary warfare 
in which we were engaged. ‘The g-2’s in the open were bombarded almost 
daily with from 400 to 500 rounds of §-9-inch; and, although the guns 
were not actually put completely out of action, the sand-bag emplace- 
ments were destroyed faster than we could repair them. The elevating 
and training gear was put out of action on several separate occasions, and 
finally the ammunition pits were stove in and the breach mechanism of 
both guns rendered useless by being struck by pieces of shell. It was, 
therefore, decided to build concrete gun-pits similar to those of Barrington 
and Eastney. A suitable position was found a few hundred yards inland, 
and abreast of, the 6-inch gun-pits. These new double pits (named Carnac 
battery) were completed by Christmas Day, 1916. The year 1917 com- 
menced therefore with four 9:2-inch and two 6-inch guns mounted in 
strong concrete casemates, with sufficient sand heaped on top of them as 
to make them secure against anything except two or three direct hits in 
the same place from a very heavy shell, or a chance shot coming inside 
the embrasure. 

Towards the end of 1916 some important changes took place in the 
personnel of the siege-guns. 'T'wo of the active service officers, Lieutenants 
Tufnell and Caswell, were recalled to the Fleet, and it became an under- 
stood thing that casualties among both officers and men were to be filled 
from the R.N.R. or Royal Marines ; since the increase in numbers of our 
anti-submarine craft made it imperative that no trained regular Naval 
officer should be employed on work that could be performed by Marine 
or Reserve officers. We were, therefore, reinforced about this time by 
Lieutenant-Commander King, R.N.R., who took charge of the 6-inch 
guns, and Sub-Lieutenant Donovan, R.N.R., who came out as second in 
command of the Carnac battery. Several Marine officers joined a little 
later on to relieve Lieutenant Lord Maidstone and Lieutenant Shoppee as 
observers. We were also allowed a Naval paymaster, Staff Paymaster 
Williams, who, apart from his clerical work, which was not much, acted 
as observer, plotter, or did with ability any executive work that came along. 
About this time, too, Major Charles Flint relieved Captain Wilson as 
C.O. of the Canadians, and Commander Bickford, after this change, spent 
most of his time with the guns, he and Major Flint between them doing all 
the mounting and shifting of guns. It is impossible to overrate the assist- 
ance given by these two officers and the Canadian detachment generally. 
Their work was always done during darkness ; and, later on, when urgency 
required, no enemy bombardments either of shell or gas were allowed to 
interrupt the making of new positions or the mounting of the guns, some 
of which were actually within a few hundred yards of the enemy outposts. 
Commander Bickford would work for days and nights on end without 
apparently taking any rest. It was truly said of him that “‘ he went forty- 
eight hours to the gallon.”’ 

It is needless in this volume to describe in detail the work done by us 
in landing and mounting guns ashore to assist in dominating the German 
batteries during our projective landing on the coast. Suffice it to say that 


ee 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 239 


we transported and mounted four short 9-2-inch guns, three long-range 
g:2-inch guns, three long-range fifty-ton 12-inch guns, and eight 7-5-inch. 
The 12-inch were landed, transported by road, and mounted without the 
use of a crane. This work presented many novel problems, the solution 
of which afforded us many hours of interest as well as relaxation from the 
more vital problems of the patrol. (See Plate IX.) 

From the beginning of 1917 to the end of June the siege-gun unit 
played an important part in the operations of the coast sector. The 
French had no guns suitable to counter-battery the enemy’s long-range 
naval guns, and consequently our guns were frequently and extravagantly 
used both for counter-battery and destructive purposes. The enemy soon 
located their positions, and when the spring brought with it suitable shoot- 
ing weather, no one single day was allowed to pass without one of our 
batteries being the object of a destructive shoot. The accuracy and weight 
of the enemy’s fire soon began to take effect ; Barrington received a direct 
hit from an 11-inch howitzer, which cut the gun clean in two, and within 
a few days the g-2-inch also received a direct hit from a §-9-inch. From 
this time onwards it may be said that the foremost 9-2’s were never of any 
real service. For, although they were in action at intervals, they were 
immediately bombarded and, as a rule, put out of action for several days, 
or even weeks. One of the two 6-inch gun-pits was completely destroyed, 
so the gun was mounted in a new and what seemed to be an impregnable 
position farther back. After a few shots, however, the gun was completely 
wrecked, and the pit was not used until a 7-5 was mounted in it later on 
in the year. 

Within a few weeks Carnac battery alone remained in action, but it 
received a concentrated shoot on practically every fine day. The enemy, 
as a rule, used to give it anything from between 300 to 600 rounds of 
extremely accurate 5-9-inch. As many as forty or fifty hits would be 
obtained on the gun-pits in one day, though of course the amount of sand 
on the concrete pits prevented any serious damage being done. 

April was an unlucky month for our naval guns, as Carnac received a 
heavy shell in the right pit, wrecking the gun and killing or wounding all 
the crew, among the killed being Sub-Lieutenant Donovan, R.N.R. 

In May and June the sector gradually became much more lively, as 
without any attempt at secrecy, the British began to make preparations for 
taking over that part of the Front. Roads and camps were shelled at all 
hours of the day and night, but the siege-guns had a much easier time of it, 
as there were many more targets for the enemy to fire on. Eight naval 
7°5-inch guns were added to the forward command, to mount which, under 
the conditions then existing, was no easy task. Gas attacks and bombard- 
ments were of daily occurrence and our casualties were heavy owing to our 
batteries being close to the enemy’s front line. During the few months in 
which our men were with the Fourth Army, out of our normal establishment 
of the R.N.S.G. of eight officers and one hundred and fifty men, we lost 
three officers killed and three wounded, and the casualties among the men 
were over fifty per cent. As the positions of our camps were known to the 


240 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


enemy, they came in for heavy shelling; but it was noted that, when 
once again we got command of the air, the enemy never attempted to shell 
gun positions, the majority of losses occurring in or about the camps rather 
than in fighting the guns. For the first time our artillery was, so far as 
quantity is concerned, much superior to that of the enemy. 

The British Army remained in the Nieuport sector until late in the year. 
After the abandonment of the coast landing the réle of the R.N.S.G. 
resolved itself into retaliation strafes on roads and villages. After the 
French reoccupied that part of the line, the siege-guns never again played 
the important part they did earlier in the year when they were the only 
guns in the sector with long enough range to allow them to compete with 
the long-range naval guns of the enemy. 

Dover was, of course, the headquarters of the Dover Patrol. Its harbour, 
although by no means ideal, was a safe place in all weathers, but consider- 
able care was necessary on the part of the ships when picking up or leaving 
their buoys in bad weather. The accommodation was limited; and, 
in 1917, when the number of destroyers increased beyond the normal 
twenty-four, which necessitated some dozen or so being in harbour at 
the same time, they had to be double-banked by berthing them in pairs 
alongside each other. In south-westerly gales this was, of course, impos- 
sible, and a certain number had to be sent to anchor off Dunkirk. The 
destroyer moorings were close to the shore, and were therefore awkward 
to pick up in a strong breeze at low water. In bad weather the vessels 
rolled some twenty degrees when lying at their moorings. 

On one occasion two men who had broken their leave, and stayed ashore 
for the night, from a torpedo-boat, gave as an excuse, that they had had no 
sleep for a week. On alternate nights they had been at sea; and, on the 
others, the boat had knocked about so badly in harbour that it had been 
impossible to get any rest. However, the harbour was a harbour, and if 
any one grumbled, I gave him the option of remaining outside ! Needless 
to say this alternative was never accepted. 

The harbour was regulated by the King’s Harbour Master, who origin- 
ally combined this duty with that of the Naval head of the Dockyard. 
Captain Arnot Henderson ably filled the post in 1914-15. Later on, when 
the Patrol had expanded, this officer was succeeded by Rear-Admiral 
Heathcote Grant as Admiral Superintendent of the Dockyard, who was of 
the greatest assistance to me. It was a great regret to us all that, early 
in 1917, he was appointed to the important post of Admiral and Senior 
Officer at Gibraltar. He was succeeded by Rear-Admiral C. F. Dampier, 
who filled his place with energy and ability. 

The “ works ”’ side of the dockyard was under the charge of Mr. Short- 
ridge, C.E., for most of the time during the years 1914-17, and much 
onerous work fell on him. The engineering portion of the dockyard I 
placed under Engineer Captain Parsons, C.B.E., the Engineer Captain 
of the Sixth Flotilla, a capable and hard-working Engineer Officer. 

At the commencement of the War Dover possessed merely a small 
submarine base. The Sixth Flotilla of destroyers was at once sent there, 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 241 


and the organisation of an engineering side to the dockyard equipment was 
commenced to deal with the necessary repairs. 

The shops of the Dover Engineering Company were taken up on the 
net cost percentage system of Admiralty control, and a local arrangement 
made with the South-Eastern and Chatham Railway Shop, while Messrs. 
Palmer’s Sheet Metal Works at Dover were afterwards requisitioned. 

By 1915 a considerable increase had taken place in all classes of vessels, 
and it was beginning to be recognised that the War might be a prolonged 
one ; so additional temporary workshops, comprising those for engineer- 
ing, constructive, and electrical works, were built in the dockyard. 

Up to 1916 the stokers of the ships did their own boiler cleaning ; 
but, to ease these ratings during stand-offs and to obtain a more efficient 
system applicable to the newer T.B.D.’s, a boiler-cleaning party was 
established, R.N. stokers being obtained for this purpose from the depots, 
and lent to ships during their periodical stand-offs. 

At the end of 1917 the Patrol comprised over 400 vessels, the largest 
auxiliary patrol inthe country. For all these upkeep, engineering repairs, 
minor additions and alterations, periodical inspections, etc., had to be 
provided; while assistance had to be given to colliers, transports, air 
stations, motor-lighters, boom defence machinery, Dunkirk shore naval 
defences, dockyard plant, tugs, steamboats, motor boats, and water tanks, 
and local salvage operations had to be carried out. In addition, work had 
to be carried out at Dunkirk, Folkestone, and Ramsgate. Various smoke- 
screen, submarine-netting, gun-sighting, and other war experimental work, 
was continually in progress. So that the base engineering requirements 
were many and varied, and without the wholehearted labours of the dock- 
yard the efficiency of the Patrol would have suffered badly. 

The need of some convenient fleet repair shop was felt for the vessels 
using Granville Dock, which is remote from the dockyard. A disused 
steel lighter, belonging to the works department, was found, and, with 
Admiralty approval, fitted up mainly by fleet labour as a repair vessel, 
known locally as H.M.S. Mussel. A boiler, lathes, drilling machine, 
smiths’ and coppersmiths’ forges, vice benches, air compressor, dynamo, 
and store-room for tools and pneumatic plant being installed. The 
dynamo gave light to T.B.D.’s during stand-off. 

Shop repair work was done at the Sixth Flotilla shops. The first 
overflow being to the Superintending Civil Engineers’ shops. This 
employed about thirty civilian mechanics, and did excellent work under the 
able foreman, Mr. Ramsay. Beyond this, repairs went to the Dover 
Engineering Company, under the very willing direction of Mr. V. Elking- 
ton, the Managing Director. Other casual defects were tended to by the 
S.E. Railway shop. 

Ships returning to harbour with breakdowns were dealt with immedi- 
ately, a night duty party of E.R.A.’s being always in attendance. For 
urgent defects the only paper work required was a label marked “‘ URGENT ”’ 
on the item sent to the workshops. In order to prevent congestion of 
work in one dockyard shop and slackness in another, and to avoid duplica- 


Q 


242 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


tion of special tools, I placed the Engineer Captain in general control of the 
whole of the engineering repair work. 

The defences of the port were in the hands of the military officers, 
Brigadier-General Crampton being in command in 1915 ; he was succeeded 
by Brigadier-General Bickford. A most cordial relation existed between 
these officers and myself, and, in every way, they did all they could to 
facilitate the naval work of the port. The arrangement, however, whereby 
the fixed defences of a Naval harbour are in the hands of anyone but the 
Naval officer in command, is illogical, and the control cannot be so efficient 
in war time as if it were vested in him. The control of the civil population, 
the keeping of order in the town, etc., constitute the proper function of 
the military, for it is work that does not affect the Naval Command ; but 
surely the harbours, control of the examination service, and the control 
of the batteries able to fire on vessels approaching the port should be under 
Naval command. This is more especially the case when auxiliaries, un- 
accustomed to naval routine, such as trawlers and drifters, frequent the 
harbour ; as these partially trained vessels are often in trouble over the 
‘* signal for the day,”! and had constantly to enter and leave the port on 
special duty. Much common sense and relaxation of regulations are 
necessary, and, in our case at Dover, had it not been for the exercise of such 
qualities on the part of the military, half the drifters and trawlers might 
have been sunk by our own batteries. Frequently I received well-grounded 
remonstrances from the military authorities as to the way some of the little 
tired vessels tried to come in regardless of etiquette. My invariable answer 
was, ‘‘I am sorry, but we deal with irregular and semi-trained forces. 
For goodness’ sake continue as hitherto to exercise common sense, or we 
shall be having regrettable incidents. The enemy is not going to try and 
take the harbour with trawlers and drifters, they have none.”’ The frequent 
infraction of regulations was not fair on the military authorities, but often 
they could not be avoided. 

This, however, was not the really important line of contact between the 
control exercised by the two forces. Five-minute raids exposed the weak- 
ness of the dual control. If enemy destroyers fired at Dover, of course, 
the military had guns at their disposal; but, I, on the other hand, had 
destroyer patrols in the offing. The enemy would primarily have tried to 
bombard at about 8000 to 10,000 yards, firing blindly at the town. The 
batteries would have had nothing but flashes in the night at an unknown 
range to fire at, and could not possibly have distinguished the flashes of the 
guns of our destroyers from those of the enemy. As the best chance of 
engaging successfully and driving off the enemy’s boats lay in close engage- 
ment by the patrol, and not long-range blind firing, I requested the 
General not to fire on such occasions unless I asked him to do s0, so as to 
safeguard my boats that might be engaging the enemy. Naturally such a 


1 The “ signal for the day ”’ is a signal used by all Naval vessels in war time 
when approaching a harbour. As it is changed daily, there is little chance of the 
enemy discovering it in time to make use of it. The drifters and trawlers often 
got muddled in dates and signals. 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 243 


request led to conferences in London in 1917, when it was decided that 
the procedure should be reversed and the guns should fire at once, but 
cease firing when I asked them to do so. This suited me equally well; 
but in order to save unnecessary delay, I left a standing order that whenever 
the military returned the fire of an enemy shelling the neighbourhood, 
automatically a message was to be sent asking them to cease fire, as our 
patrols were close at hand at this period. A slightly Gilbertian proceeding. 
It might have been necessary to fire on a vessel approaching for blockade 
purposes, although very unlikely. From the point of view of military 
responsibility, the reservation of the right to return fire was advisable ; 
but this was antagonistic to the Naval situation, and the responsibility 
should have rested with the Naval and not the Military authorities. 

The sensible arrangement would have been to have placed the Battery 
Commander directly under the Admiral, who would have known the 
exact position of the patrols at any given moment. Since the patrols 
in the offing turned at certain points at definite times, the position of our 
destroyers was always known to me within a few hundred yards. The 
closeness of the nearest patrol to the raider could therefore be gauged 
instantly by me, and I was in a position to judge whether the battery fire 
could be safely used before the destroyer engagement could develop. 
A proposal was made that there should be a liaison officer with the Fire 
Commander ; but I always hold that an advisory person is useless. The 
infallible law, when at war as distinct from peace, should be that the person 
who 1s given command should be he who has the knowledge, since on him lies 
the responsibility. It is useless to have persons in command with other 
people to tell them what to do. 

I venture to say that seamen are as good gunners as the Royal Artillery, 
so that no objection on this score exists. The Royal Marine Artillery would 
make excellent gunners for Naval port defence guns. But then we, as a 
country, never exercise common sense in our preparations for war. We 
seem to love to hedge ourselves in with anachronisms which cannot stand 
the test of logical argument, and therefore create difficult conditions in 
war time. 

If I remember correctly, when the question of whether the Army or 
Navy should control the fixed defences of our Naval harbours was decided, 
the governing argument was not which was the most efficient arrangement, 
but it was decided that the defences should be placed under the Army 
because the Admiralty did not wish to increase the total of the annual 
Naval vote. It looked so bad on paper to jump up a million or so on the 
estimates when every penny for essentials had to be fought for. The 
fear was that the cost, appearing in the Navy instead of the Army vote, 
would indirectly and adversely affect the vote for new construction. This 
led to a wrong allocation of responsibility in war time. 

A good deal of salvage work was carried out at Dover. Fortunately 
before the War the Dover Harbour Board possessed two magnificent ocean- 
going tugs, probably the finest in the country, the Lady Brassey and the 
Lady Crundall. These were taken up by the Admiralty for examination 


244 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


purposes. However, they were always close at hand, either in port or off 
the harbour ; so I fitted up a trawler as a standby examination vessel, and 
bundled the examination staff into her in emergencies when both tugs were 
urgently required. The greatest salvage asset, however, was Captain 
John Iron, the Harbour Master, the third generation in direct descent of 
Dover harbour masters, grandfather, father, and son. His family was a 
direct link between the Dover cross-Channel sailing packets in the 
smuggler days, and our present fine steamers and prosaic times. What 
Captain Iron possessed was experience, that much-despised but all- 
important asset. He knew every soft spot between Portsmouth and the 
Thames, and where best to beach a vessel. Of weather and tides he had 
a better knowledge than anyone else, and, as a ready rough emergency 
leak-stopper, few equalled him. On one occasion he took, accidentally, it is 
true, a vessel to the Thames, with nothing but a large chalk boulder stop- 
ping a leak. 

After a very short acquaintance, I took him on as Chief Salvage Officer, 
and everyone except the captains of ships were subject to his directions 
in salvage cases. I never regretted the day I did so, for he salved one 
hundred and sixteen vessels ; this shows how well he worked. Surely a fine 
record. One tug and a motor launch were at his disposal day and night, 
and all reports of collisions, groundings, or minings went straight to him, 
since it was the first hour after an accident that usually decided the fate 
of the vessel. 

One day a breezy gentleman blew into my office and informed me he had 
arrived as Admiralty Salvage Officer at Dover. I thanked him and told 
him I was glad to welcome him as the Admiralty Salvage Officer, but, 
at the same time, I explained that my Salvage Officer who had immediate 
charge of all emergency salvage work, was Captain John Iron. He returned 
to the Admiralty and reported the interview. Fortunately that body 
appreciated that local experience was the one essential, and left me and 
Captain Iron in peace. 

It would be remiss to omit mention of the good work done by the ladies 
of the port in connection with the widows and orphans of men killed on 
service. Such work of mercy can be dealt with best by women, and it was 
of the greatest assistance to the Admiral to have so many sympathetic 
helpers to do work which was most necessary and which he was certainly 
incapable of carrying out. There is a silly and small-minded sect in the 
Navy, or rather there used to be one, which objected to the wives of 
naval officers and men being in the port which their husbands frequent. 
In all my experience I have never known a case of duty being neglected 
for the sake of a wife or family. Generally the complaint is from the other 
quarter, that duty occupies so much of the husband’s time that too little 
time was spent ashore. I hope whatever nonsense existed in this respect 
will have been dispelled by the War. The work done by the wives in the 
War should in future make the authorities sympathetic to their existence. 

The work of the Patrol was so dangerous, so hard, and so incessant 
that I sincerely desired that whenever the officers and men had a day or two 


DUNKIRK AND DOVER 245 


off, those days should be as pleasant as possible, and therefore the more 
wives and families accumulated at Dover the better I was pleased. Air 
raids, of course, shook some of them up, and their children were par- 
ticularly affected, but they showed a courage almost universal both in such 
times of alarm and also in the frequent sad bereavements which strewed 
the wake of the daily work of the Patrol. 

One of the chief events at Dover was the inspection of the Patrol by 
His Majesty the King. It may be difficult for some persons, perhaps, in 
these extremely democratic days to realise how much good this visit did 
to the Patrol. Hitherto officers and men had looked on their work as 
prosaic, it was true that they were at war and were doing their bit ; but 
the fact that the King thought it worth his while to come to Dover and 
inspect the various activities, at once brought home to them the national 
importance of their services in a way that nothing else could have done, and 
their morale was correspondingly strengthened. ‘The trawler and drifter 
crews valued immensely the fact that the King boarded one of each of these 
craft and examined the details of the accommodation and their war appli- 
ances. I was glad to have the opportunity of presenting Lieutenant- 
Commander Garside-Tipping to His Majesty, as the oldest officer serving 
afloat. Next day he was killed in action with the King’s congratulation on 
his patriotic service still fresh in his mind (see page 103). 

We who command are apt to forget how much commendation is valued 
by those below us. Most of us are not impressed by the status of our 
appointments, since we have gradually and slowly grown to acquire rank. 
It is most important for those in command to realise the manner in 
which any approval they may express is treasured by those under them. 
I have been much struck in writing these chapters to observe how 
approbatory signals have been jealously guarded, and given prominence 
to in records of the Patrol which were kept at the time; and conversely, 
occasions when praise which was due may have been omitted must have 
produced a corresponding feeling of neglect. It is one of those human 
factors to which, in the stress of war, one is apt to pay too little attention. 

The Dover Patrol owes a considerable debt of gratitude to the Mayor 
of Dover, Mr. Farley,1 the Corporation, and many inhabitants for their 
kindly help and generosity. No occasion for helping the Patrol was ever 
neglected. It is impossible to mention all who so kindly assisted the men 
and their wives. They are too numerous, and I hope the omission to do so 
will be forgiven. 

1 Now Sir Edwin Farley 


THE TIDES 


Ye restless tides of Dover, with your ceaseless ebb and flow 

Like warding sleepless watch-dogs ever prowling to and fro, 

Twice a day ye meet the North Sea tides, and with them fiercely sway 
North and Southward in the struggle, in the fight for right of way. 


From Dover to the Ruytingen, from Folkestone to Gris-Nez, 

Ye scour the passage cleanly, hour by hour and day by day, 
Thus the Channel that Old England, from the Continent divides, 
Is swept and keeps us sea-girt by the labours of ye tides. 


But in payment for your labours, ye take toll of those that pass 
By strandings and collisions, and by founderings, alas, 

Ye claim your due proportion of our vessels and their crews 
And draw them to your hidden layer to pay the Channel dues. 


Are ye friends of ours, or enemies, ye tides of double face ? 
Ye keep us safe an island, yet ye take toll of our race, 

Speak frankly, we will listen, for our right it is to know 

Why ye work in two directions like your shifting ebb and flow. 


Then the tides replied with chidings, ‘‘ You are either babes or fools, 
That you know not your instructors, neither recognise your schools. 
The sea has trained your nation, in it fashioned all that’s best, 

Can you grumble, that in training, some are gathered to their rest ? 


** Would you be the race ye are now, if it were not for the sea ? 
Look at your late antagonist, realise why he is he, 

Had his forebears fought blue water, had we trained him as he grew, 
War had been a different problem, had a different ending, too ! 


“* Be you thankful, ye of England, that the sea is no soft friend, 
That you fought us and will fight us tides unto the bitter end, 
Not in anger, not in rivalry, but as the steel the flint, 

So the fibre that’s born in you is full stamped with our imprint.” 


TO DUNKIRK 


Town of stirring memories, steadfastly you stand, 

While your gallant folk fulfil history’s demand 

Though a target for the foe, every night you are, 

You have shown a courage worthy of the brave Jean Bart. 


Mid the crash and bursts of shell never yet dismayed, 
Through the tempest of the bombs calmly unafraid, 

Not a house 1s left unharmed, each one bears a scar, 
People die in manner taught them by the brave Jean Bart. 


Order of St. Louis then shone upon his breast, 

Croix de Guerre and D.S.C. your fortitude attest, 

Listen ! from Valhalla faintly echoing afar, 

Proudly rolls the ‘‘ Bravo ! Bravo!’ of the stern Jean Bart. 


246 


CHAPTER XIV 
SMALL CRAFT 


Coastal motor boats—Their disabilities—Their uses—How torpedoes were fired— 
Sink a destroyer—A second success—A weird experience—Firing at the boats 
inside the Mole—A useless operation—Motor launches—Their various uses— 
The ao submarines—Their uses—E boat sinks a submarine—General 
remarks. 


HE most novel class of vessels which we had at Dover was the 
coastal motor boat, called for short C.M.B. These vessels were 
entirely for fine weather use, only forty feet in length and designed 
for a minimum speed of thirty knots. They were armed with a single 
torpedo which was fired tail first over the stern. This may seem to be an 
extraordinary procedure; but in reality it was a particularly brilliant 
conception. Since the C.M.B. was travelling on the surface at just about 
the same speed as the torpedo would be travelling during its run, it was 
obviously correct that the torpedo, on discharge, should be pointing in 
the same direction as that in which the C.M.B. was moving, so that it 
could at once pick up its proper speed below water. Dropping the 
torpedo tail first over the stern was therefore the correct procedure. 
As every seaman knows, it is quite impossible to maintain a high speed 
in any sea without length of vessel, the underlying principle being that the 
ship should be of sufficient length not to drop her nose into the hollow 
of an approaching wave; if this happens she drives into the wall of 
water instead of riding over it, with the result that she encounters a more 
or less solid obstruction and takes a considerable amount of water in over 
the bow. The velocity with which the water comes on board is at least 
equal to the speed of the ship, and serious damage is the result. Not only 
did the C.M.B.’s suffer in this respect, but, in addition, their trim when 
steaming at full speed was always with the bow up and stern down, so 
in a short sea they jumped from wave to wave, landing with a thud on the 
water, which brought a considerable and also unfair strain on their hulls. 
It may appear that having apparently damned the C.M.B. from a 
practical point of view, there is little more to be said; but that is not so. 
The great value of the C.M.B. lay in the combination of high speed and 
invisibility due to small size. No better example of the value of special- 
class vessels exists than the C.M.B., provided that its limitations were 
realised and patience in its use was exercised. As a weapon in the armoury 
of an Admiral the C.M.B.’s possessed great potential value, provided that 
both their general unreliability, and their special uses were recognised. 


247 


248 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Now young officers in command of such vessels naturally thirst for 
opportunities of distinguishing themselves. ‘They long to be at the 
enemy, or looking for him whenever the weather is suitable. Such a 
spirit is most laudable but it cannot always be indulged. War is a serious 
matter, and is not waged for the benefit of old or young officers; their 
participation in it is a mere incident; they, and their vessels, have to be 
subordinated to the general strategical conditions. ‘There is an art 
underlying the use of all vessels, particularly of small craft. Often the 
interests of the country are best served by keeping the vessels idle. This is 
irksome to their crews, and not their idea of war, and naturally they chafe 
under enforced inactivity. Let me explain a little more fully. 

The coastal motor boats were useful mainly at night. In day-time, and 
bright moonlight nights, which may be looked on as daylight, the German 
destroyers could hunt them down. On very dark nights the visibility is so 
poor that they were not suitable for purposes of attack on destroyers, 
since craft which are as low in the water as the C.M.B.’s cannot see their 
prey anything like as well as their prey can see them. ‘The best nights, 
therefore, on which to use the boats were about the first and last quarters 
of the moon. Their functions were two-fold, to attack enemy vessels and 
to lay mines. 

The best chance of bringing off a successful attack is on the first occasion 
that such boats are used ; for then the enemy would be quite unprepared 
for a new class of attack. As soon, therefore, as the boats had had a little 
practice in working off Ostend an attempt was made on the Zeebrugge 
destroyers in conjunction with the R.N.A.S. The idea was to send the 
C.M.B.’s to the vicinity of the Mole; bomb it heavily from the air ; and 
then for the C.M.B.’s to attack any vessel that might put to sea to get 
clear of the bombing. The attack was carried out; everything happened 
as we anticipated, and one destroyer was sunk, another being damaged. 
It was an operation thoroughly well carried out, and one that did the 
officers and men good and served the interests of the country. 

About this time C.M.B.’s were often sent, usually in pairs, to patrol 
in the vicinity of the approaches to Ostend and Zeebrugge. On April 
30th, 1917, after steaming for about an hour and a half to and from the 
coast a little to the eastward of Ostend harbour, an air raid commenced 
over the town, and the boats proceeded closer inshore, keeping a careful 
look-out for any vessels leaving or entering. An enemy vessel was sighted 
against the moon by Lieutenant-Commander Welman in No. 7 C.M.B., 
possibly a mile distant. When the enemy was about half a mile away, he, 
in company with No. 13 C.M.B., stopped to obtain a thoroughly good 
estimate of the ship’s course and speed. He then proceeded to draw off 
in order to increase speed and attack from a favourable position. The 
C.M.B.’s were, however, observed much earlier than had been expected, 
which gave the enemy time to turn away and increase speed. Gradually 
one boat came up on each quarter of the enemy, and worked out on each 
beam. As the C.M.B.’s were heading shorewards it was obvious that 
they shortly would have to turn. Lieutenant-Commander Welman turned 


SMALL CRAFT 249 


to starboard under considerable helm,and his C.M.B. fired a torpedo 
at about four hundred yards’ range, and observed a large yellow-red flash, 
immediately surrounded by a T-shaped cloud of heavy black smoke. 
As is usual after firing at close range, both C.M.B.’s retired at full speed. 
On hearing the explosion and feeling the consequent concussion on the 
boat, No. 7 slowed down, and, as gun-fire had now ceased, prepared to 
return to the vicinity. Just after turning the position of the torpedoed 
vessel was indicated by smoke, after which a red glow was observed which 
seemed to disappear below the surface accompanied by a cloud of smoke 
or steam. Shrapnel from shore batteries then made it prudent to withdraw. 

On May 2nd an incident occurred which might have had disastrous 
consequences for the C.M.B. Flotilla, but it is one which also had its 
humorous side, which, however, the participants were slow to appreciate ! 
Four C.M.B.’s started off to hunt for a destroyer that was supposed to be 
patrolling off Ostend. All went well till the boats suddenly and unex- 
pectedly found that they themselves were being hunted by four large 
destroyers which were close upon them. Being too close to turn and 
attack! they, in accordance with the orders they had previously received, 
scattered like a covey of partridges. No. 7 C.M.B. was the one that the 
enemy selected to follow, and she was chased well away to the westward 
before she shook off her pursuer, having by that time two bullet holes in 
her carburettor, three in the induction pipe, one in the water jacket of 
the engine, and two in the steering compass. She was, therefore, in no 
condition to turn and try to torpedo her pursuers. The Captain of No. 2 
was wounded by a bullet; this practically put the boat out of action. 
The engine of No. 10 was running badly, and she was therefore unable to 
turn and overhaul the destroyers after she had shaken them off. The 
steering ropes of No. 13 carried away and she proceeded to turn circles 
through the enemy’s lines. Twice she circled right in among the destroyers, 
both sides firing revolvers at each other; she fired her torpedo, which 
ran under a destroyer. After the second circle when well away from the 
enemy’s destroyers, she wisely stopped her engine and was lost sight of 
by them. The broad white track left by the boats when steaming fast 
undoubtedly attracted the attention of the destroyers before they were 
observed by the C.M.B.’s, consequently the destroyers got too close to 
allow the C.M.B.’s sufficient time and distance to make the large turn 
which was requisite to bring them bows on to the destroyers, a position 
which was necessary before an attack could be made. It is probable that 
a good look-out had been kept ahead but little astern. The result was 
that the machine-gun fire put two boats hors de combat ; one other boat 
had the time of its life; and the fourth had a “ missing”’ engine. But 
it was a useful incident, if only to show the younger brain that success is 
not achieved without experience, and that meticulous care is required 
in carrying out all operations. 


1 These light, fast craft took a very large circle to turn in. ‘To have attempted 
to turn quickly, would have had the same effect as turning a corner too sharply in 
a dog-cart, namely, to capsize. 


250 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


After this date I did not wish to practise the enemy’s patrols previous 
to our launching the Great Landing, and therefore I closed down work with 
the C.M.B.’s except to lay mines off the occulting buoy near Zeebrugge, 
which accounted for at least one German vessel. 

On August 22nd, 1917, when the hopes of the Great Landing were 
fading, I sent the C.M.B.’s to fire torpedoes on the inner side of the Mole 
at Zeebrugge, at the place at which the destroyers usually lay. ‘This is one 
of the only two things I have ever regretted so far as operations are 
concerned during the time I commanded at Dover.* 

However, the young officers in the C.M.B.’s were thirsting for glory, 
and a safety valve was desirable, so I told the Commodore to send them to 
fire at the inside of the Mole. As might have been expected the exact 
spot was not hit, and no damage was done except to ourselves, for the 
incident pointed out to the enemy the undefended nature of the inside of 
the Mole. He immediately proceeded to lay an obstruction from the end 
of the Mole to the shore, leaving only a gap near the Mole. This was 
exactly one of those operations that an admiral should not have sanctioned ; 
it was sparring instead of hitting hard. It is wrong to practise the enemy 
by useless operations; either hit hard or leave him alone; even if the 
young, gallant officers in small craft do fume and chafe at inactivity. 

The difficulty of making a success of this attack on the Mole, lay in the 
enemy destroyers not being visible against the dark background of the 
masonry ; also, as the torpedoes from the C.M.B.’s had to be fired when 
the boats were going at their full speed, thirty-three knots, and there was 
nothing by which they could judge their distance from the Mole, they had 
no idea when to fire their torpedoes or how near to or how far they were 
from their objective. There was no clear silhouette against the sky, as in 
the attack on a destroyer at sea. The torpedoes were therefore fired 
blindly at an estimated spot. 

In addition to the C.M.B.’s we had motor launches. These craft first 
came.to Dover in November 1915 under the command of Commander 
Hamilton Benn,? M.P., R.N.V.R., a very fortunate selection so far as the 
Flotilla was concerned. At first there seemed to be no really good use 
to which they could be put. They were fine-weather boats of only 1-inch 
wood planking and 14-inch timbers ; they were too short and low in the 
bow for bad-weather work, so that they could not be relied on to take 
regular turns on patrol; however, having been given them, I tried to 
put them to some use ; and eventually they became a most useful adjunct 
for burning our smoke-screens. When they first arrived experiments to 
obtain a smoke-screen were in full swing. After months of trial and 
experiment a really good method of obtaining smoke was evolved. 

When the Great Landing was in contemplation, I arranged for Captain 


1 My second regret was not to have thought of designing a special vessel half 
destroyer and half submarine, but chiefly submarine, running awash and with 
torpedoes specially adjusted to run in shallow water, to torpedo the lock gates at 
Zeebrugge. 

2 Now Sir Ian Hamilton Benn, Bart. 


SMALL CRAFT 251 


Colin Maclean to be appointed to take charge of the training of all the 
ninety M.L.’s allocated for our smoke-screen. In order not to deplete 
the other bases for too long a time, divisions were sent to Dover to have 
burners fitted and to be trained, after which they were returned to their 
own ports. In this work Captain Maclean was quite invaluable, giving 
instruction in station keeping and the working of boats together in 
divisions. 'There were few officers with whom I parted with greater regret 
than with this able and gallant officer who was of the greatest assistance 
to me. 

Every day during 1917, after the barrage on the Belgian coast had been 
laid, one division of M.L.’s at Dunkirk was ready to go out and burn a 
smoke-screen for the monitor on patrol, if the weather allowed firing at 
Ostend to take place. But creating a smoke-screen was by no means the 
only duty of the M.L.’s. Very soon after the arrival of the first boats 
we devised a method of fitting a light wire sweep for exploratory sweeping. 
In other words we ran a couple of M.L.’s with a light sweep over certain 
routes to see if there were any mines. They were of themselves too light 
to sweep up mines, but they were heavy enough to tell if their sweep 
fouled any obstruction. Their speed enabled sweeping to be rapidly 
carried out and their light draught made them specially safe vessels for the 
purpose. They could not, however, be relied on for work in all weathers, 
and as mine-sweeping at Dover had to be carried out in fair weather and 
foul, they could merely be looked upon as auxiliary to the mine-sweeping 
organisation. 

On several occasions they were valuable in saving life after accidents, 
as, for instance, when the Anglia was mined, and they brought in seventy- 
two persons ; they also rescued seventy-eight survivors from the Maloja. 
The officers and men always responded nobly to every call. They were 
largely officered by amateur yachtsmen, but many members of their crews 
had had no previous sea experience. Fortunately these contained a nucleus 
of Scotch and East Coast fishermen, than whom there are no better men 
in the world for small craft. The officers were all given short courses in 
navigation, gunnery, and signalling at Greenwich and Portsmouth. The 
crew and engine-room complements were also given various courses of train- 
ing. The navigation that really was required was that of the amateur yachts- 
man who can read a chart, use parallel rulers and compasses, and take in the 
pilotage of a harbour by a glance at the chart, even as we did in the old 
torpedo boat days. Then in bad weather we used to fold the chart along 
the line we wished to steer, and make a parallel crease through the compass 
printed on it to find the course ! The picture the M.L.’s have left on my 
mind is that of boats invaluable for smoke, and possessing that general 
utility that attaches to light-draught vessels with high speed. Their crews 
were only too eager to work, but their greatness of heart was apt to over- 
estimate the physical abilities of the vessels. To Commander Hamilton 
Benn they owed their discipline and much of their success. 

I must add something about the submarines at Dover. They had a 
weary time and not much fun. Their chief function was to protect the 


252 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Straits in case of a raid by the enemy’s cruisers. Such a raid never took 
place, therefore they were deprived of their only reasonable objective. 
As can be imagined their use for any other purpose was always over- 
shadowed by their passable resemblance to the enemy’s submarines. 
It would have been most unwise to introduce the slightest doubt into the 
minds of the patrols in the matter of attack on submarines. Every sub- 
marine or periscope had to be attacked the moment it was seen. Chal- 
lenging, signs and counter-signs are all very well for surface craft, but for 
real work in destroying submarines which in ten seconds can dive and be 
lost to view, there is nothing like instant action without any arriére pensée. 
Such action can only come with the knowledge that every submarine 
seen is an enemy. ‘Therefore our submarines were never allowed out 
except under certain definite restrictions. Had a cruiser raid taken place, 
the French submarines and our own boats would have divided the breadth 
of the Straits between them to attack and sink the enemy. We had several 
false alarms and the boats at times left for their appointed positions, but 
they were invariably disappointed. ‘The disappointment was entirely 
theirs, I might remark, as I had no desire to see cruisers raid our thin 
defences. 

I tried using the submarines to attack enemy submarines by lying 
moored at one of the cross-Channel barrage buoys. Here the submarines 
were fitted with occulting lights and lay moored to the buoys which they 
were intended to resemble. But the ‘‘C” Class submarine suffered from 
having only bow tubes, so that they were never ready instantly to discharge 
their torpedo at an enemy whose only bearing, when observed, must have 
been approximately on the beam. On the only occasions when an enemy 
was sighted, before the submarine could slip and turn bow on to the enemy, 
the latter had disappeared in the darkness. The escort to and from their 
positions was elaborately arranged, but in addition the boats had to leave 
the harbour, and also their positions on the barrage line during dark 
hours, so as to keep the fact of their lying on the barrage secret even 
from our own patrols. Further, I experimented in their use as obser- 
vation stations to observe the fall of shot, and for creeping for electric 
cables with explosive creeps, and for taking tidal measurements off the 
Belgian coast. 

In October 1917 I obtained the loan of an “‘ E ”’ Class boat to try and 
waylay submarines to the eastward of the Goodwins-Snou barrage. The 
German submarines undoubtedly used the passage between the end of 
the barrage and the Goodwins. These waters really were part of those 
of the old mine-field laid in 1914, which for three years had been looked 
on as dangerous, but now the action of the sea and general exposure 
justified us in considering it to be a fairly safe area. This part hitherto 
had not been hunted by us, and the enemy submarines were therefore not 
likely to be keenly on the look-out. Moreover, if any enemy submarine 
sighted our boat she would probably think that it was one of their own. 
On the other hand, so long as we used one boat only she knew that any- 
thing she saw was an enemy; we thus had the same advantage that the 


SMALL CRAFT 253 


German destroyers always had up to now enjoyed in their raids on the 
Channel. 

The submarine left her patrol at dusk and was escorted through the 
barrage, and she returned to the same spot to meet her escort before 
daylight. On one occasion Lieutenant-Commander P. Phillips, in E 52, 
had a shot at a submarine, but being some distance off he missed her. 
I was much afraid that the enemy might have seen the torpedo and 
given warning to the other U boats. However, on the night of October 
31st-November 1st he got a good chance and torpedoed UC 63, which 
sank at once. One survivor was rescued. Unfortunately, this boat was 
homing, and had reported her position shortly before, so that the enemy 
were able to locate the approximate position of her loss. After this the 
Germans were on the gut vive in this area. No more submarines were 
met with. So, as often was the case, a new method was tried with one 
success, and then the enemy countered the attack. But such is war in 
modern times. 

Although the foregoing description of the work done by the smaller 
vessels has been brief it must not be concluded that their services were 
unimportant, for important they certainly were, and most arduous. Small 
craft which necessarily suffer from general sea-going disabilities must be 
looked on as special weapons in the armoury of an Admiral. In fact, the 
war vessels of the present day are to the Admiral what clubs are to the 
golfer, some often used and others on occasions only. Undoubtedly, if 
clubs were animate instead of inanimate the more weird and less frequently 
employed would clamour to be used more often. “ We are young and 
strong, use us and see what we can do’”’ would be their cry. The wise 
man would smile and encourage them, but would still use the one best 
suited for his purpose. Again, if dogs could speak many would say, 
‘* Give me a free hand to range the fields and see how many birds I can 
bring back.’”” But he who was meditating shooting over the ground 
would again smile and encourage their keenness, but would not enter on 
a course that would keep the fields disturbed and the birds with their 
heads up ready to be startled by the slightest noise. These homely 
similies may perhaps emphasise the fact that war is not won entirely by 
gallantry, but that the conduct of modern war should be governed by the 
head. It is here that patience should be exercised by all—subordinates, 
the Press, and the people of the country. 

The smaller the vessels the more is the discomfort and the greater is 
the exposure entailed by service in all but fine weather. These inherent 
disadvantages were met with cheery endurance by the crews of the small 
craft, many of whom were new to sea life. 

All who served in our flotillas of smaller vessels may look back with 
pride on the years they spent in the Dover Patrol in the service of their 
country in the Great War. 


MOTOR LAUNCHES 


Button tight the oilskin coat, towel around the neck, 
We will have a sea to-night washing down the deck, 
It’s choppy in the Channel, so it’s easy to foretell, 
That we’ll have a rotten time in H.M.S. M.L. 


Light the burners, start the smoke, quick, to get a screen, 
There will be no shoot to-day if our ships are seen. 
Tirpitz soon will worry round searching with its shell, 
But won’t do muoh hitting, thanks to H.M.S. M.L. 


“ Boats of great utility,’ that sounds very fine, 

Shallow draught and twelve-knots speed chancing to combine ; 
When an odd job comes along we know very well, 

The Admiral will order out an H.M.S. M.L. 


COASTAL MOTOR BOATS 


Smallest of our fighting craft, swiftest of the small, 

Engines of three hundred horse and forty over all, 

Swishing, seething through the sea, dashing through the night ; 
Three stout hearts and active brains centring on a fight. 


See ! an object through the dark, grip and hold the breath, 
While we launch three-hundredweight of unexpected death, 
Over with the rudder quick, turning watch the blow, 

Flash and dull explosion tell us all we care to know. 


254 


CHAPTER XV 
OPERATIONS 


The necessity for secrecy—Essentials in plans—Examples—Try the impossible— 
The use of the brow at Zeebrugge—Rehearsals—Telephone and signal 
reports—The Girl Annie—Use of shoals—Useless operations to be avoided— 
Abandonment of plans—Useless bombing—Use of uncertainty—Co-opera- 
tion with the Army—Shore batteries—How to use submarines—The super 
value of experience—Discretion of Senior Officer—Duties of an Operation 
Committee—The art of carrying out operations—The joint value of imagination 
and experience. 


It,” was a dictum of Frederick the Great. Secrecy is the main- 

stay of strategy, and surprise that of tactics. It is also obvious 
that surprise is the result of secrecy. In preparing operations too much 
emphasis cannot be laid on secrecy. During 1915 and 1916 and the first 
half of 1917 the intercourse between the Admiralty and the Admiral at 
Dover was ideal. No secret was ever put on paper, save when it was 
either typed or written personally by Sir Henry Oliver, the Chief, and 
subsequently Deputy-Chief, of the Naval Staff, or the Vice-Admiral at 
Dover. Meetings were frequent. The First Sea Lord and Sir H. Oliver 
knew everything that the Admiral proposed to do, and reasons for so 
doing, and the latter in turn knew their views, and had the advantage of 
their experience and that of Admiral of the Fleet Sir Arthur Wilson, 
whose wide knowledge and shrewdness of judgment were of the greatest 
value. Such relations were ideal. Unfortunately reform, or so-called 
reform, was instituted at the Admiralty which led to many evils and 
disturbed the previous procedure. 

In preparing operations, a large variety of points require attention, and 
the most important are generally those which entail local knowledge. 
Every operation has one or more essentials which beyond everything else 
require attention. In the original bombardment of Zeebrugge it was the 
observation of the bursts of shell that was vital, and the operations were 
postponed until some method for doing so had been devised. ‘The first 
attempt was abandoned after sailing, since the tripods, necessary for 
observing and correcting the fire of the guns, began to “‘ work ’’ on board 
the ships, owing to the sea, and the vessels carrying them could not safely 
proceed. Without observation of fire it was useless to bombard. There- 
fore this became the first essential. 

In the second bombardment, observation of fire was still the first 
essential ; but, by this time, our methods had improved immensely and 


255 


I: I thought my coat knew my plans I would take it off and burn 


256 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


aeroplane spotting was almost perfected. Five times we started, and three 
times we crossed the North Sea; four times we returned on account of 
low clouds that prevented spotting. Another point in the meantime had 
become essential. A lock gate might be damaged, but not badly so; 
it was therefore of great advantage to catch the gate shut on a falling tide,? 
and so ensure that the pressure of the water at low tide should exert its 
full force against it before temporary repairs could be undertaken. Again, 
the lock gates would probably be open at high water and therefore reason- 
ably safe ; but after high water one must be shut and so be more exposed. 
The best time, therefore, for firing was just after the tide had begun to 
fall. The dates when this occurred at daylight were therefore pivotal for 
the firings. 

In the subsequent firings on the coast the enemy had begun to use 
smoke-screens, the use of which they had learned from us. Everything 
then depended on getting the ranging shots observed before the smoke- 
screen obscured the target. Extreme rapidity of ranging became of first- 
class importance. This argued taking the enemy unawares, and led to 
our adopting dawn bombardments. As a reply to this the enemy sent out 
a seaplane patrol every day at dawn to warn him of our appraoch, so as to 
light up the smoke-screen before our firing commenced. This led to the 
abandonment of dawn bombardments and was largely responsible for the 
reinstitution of the patrol line in 1917, so that the monitors might always 
be off the enemy’s ports ready to take advantage of a clear spell of weather 
to bombard. ‘The Germans could not keep a smoke-screen burning 
continuously, so this defeated them. 

In the Great Landing everything depended on surprise, having the 
right wind, high tide, and hitting off the correct landing positions of the 
three attacks. These became essentials. Dawn again was desirable, but 
only certain dates gave sufficient water at dawn. ‘The right wind to take 
the smoke-screen near to the shore was an absolute necessity, so also the 
positioning of the pontoons to within one hundred yards ; this latter taxed 
all our ingenuity, and to obtain this almost any subsidiary advantage would 
have been sacrificed. 

In the blocking of Zeebrugge the ‘‘ jump” on to the Mole was vital ; 
every energy was therefore directed, and sacrifice sustained, to make this 
a swift sure stroke. Next the finding of the spot on the Mole, and, in the 
case of blocking Ostend, the entrance to that harbour were cardinal features ; 
and all the thought possible was directed to duplicating and multiplying 
the methods of so doing. 

Always after I had mapped out an operation I settled in my own mind 
what were the essentials, and no minor consideration was allowed ever to 
intervene to affect the efficiency of their accomplishment. 

The next point to consider was what special appliances might be 
required. I never hesitated to tax mechanism and construction to the 

1 The water on the landward side would remain at its high level, but the fall 


of the tide would leave the sea-side unsupported, and therefore a great breaking 
strain would be introduced. 


OPERATIONS 257 


uttermost to produce a novelty. I never, if possible, did the obvious thing 
or used an obvious method. 

Always, first, select the apparently impossible to see how it can be 
converted into the possible ; the guiding principle being that it is better 
to encounter and overcome difficulties in preparing for an operation than 
when executing it. 

I chose the schemes which promised the most complete surprise, and 
therefore the greatest chance of success, and worked hard at a solution, 
however enormous the trouble might appear. While there is leisure and 
time a solution to all difficulties can usually be found. 

The tripods to observe the bursts of the shells succeeded because the 
enemy never dreamed of little artificial islands being erected within 
ten thousand yards of their batteries. ‘The daily patrol off the Belgian 
coast succeeded, in spite of the apparent lessons to be learnt from the loss 
of the Hogue, Aboukir, and Cressy, because of the nets laid out. The 
Great Landing would have had a first-rate chance of success because 
the enemy would never have dreamed of our landing men in front of a 
sloping wall manned by machine-guns and infantry and under the fire of 
powerful batteries. It would have required a prophet to have foretold to 
the officer commanding the defence that, behind an impenetrable smoke- 
screen, piers 650 feet long would suddenly arrive opposite apparently the 
most impregnable part of the coast and abolish all considerations of depth 
of water, while tanks would appear suddenly as if amphibians and both 
tanks and infantry mount a 30 degree slope of wall with a three-foot 
buttress on the top, which was looked on as an unscalable barrier. 

The net and mine barrage was not swept up by the enemy in 1916 
when the patrol was called off it by Admiralty orders immediately after 
laying. This was due, I believe, to the light-buoys, which must have 
puzzled the Germans and made them suspect a trap. ‘They could not 
conceive that anyone should be such an idiot as to lay out mines and then 
mark them with light-buoys. The utter improbability of this deed saved 
the whole system. 

I arranged for the attack on Zeebrugge Mole to be from the impreg- 
nable outside with the aid of a special brow, not from the obvious inside. 
The sheer audacity and unexpectedness of choosing the apparently 
impossible should have made it a thundering success. My successor 
apparently overlooked the fact that the special brow was an integral part 
of my scheme. It was discarded, with the result that we suffered 616 
oe when 20 should have sufficed. ‘The enemy’s losses were 
only 26. 

The attack on Cambrai was a great success, because the expected wire- 
cutting bombardment never took place, but tanks were used to break 
through the wire, therefore the requisite warning was not given to the 
enemy, who was consequently quite unprepared. ‘These instances are 
sufficient to show the principle of always doing the unexpected and 
the apparently impossible, which is fundamental in carefully prepared 
operations alike afloat and ashore. 

R 


258 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


When the plans have taken a definite shape dates must be fixed. Tides, 
weather, moonlight, daylight, all play their part. Alternative dates when 
the weather suits must be selected. The provisional date selected for 
the attack fixes the late limit for rehearsals taking place. Nothing requires 
more judgment than the decision whether or not rehearsals are to take 
place, in that rehearsals affect secrecy. So long as plans are locked up 
in the minds of the Admiral and his one or two chief assistants secrecy is 
possible. As soon as parts have to be let out secrecy is apt to vanish. In 
building the pontoons for the landing that wretched process of “‘ putting 
two and two together ” by inquisitive busybodies evolved a fairly good 
idea of their use. And, mind you, when a person has guessed a secret he 
usually feels himself quite at liberty to talk about it, even if it be against 
the interests of the country, simply because it has not been divulged to 
him under the bond of secrecy. It is gratifying to some to let others 
know how clever they have been in guessing a plausible solution.? 
Conceit is a curse in war time. 

For the Zeebrugge attack the building of a false bow on to the monitors 
would have been sure to attract attention and start a guessing competi- 
tion. A solution was therefore supplied in advance, namely, that the 
increase in water-line length of the monitors might improve their speed ; 
and I wrote a camouflage letter to Sir Tennyson d’Eyncourt, the Director 
of Naval Construction, for office use, suggesting a temporary bow being 
built for that purpose. 

The eighty-foot by ten-foot landing-stage for the same operation was 
to have been built in two halves, each ostensibly for use by the monitors 
at Dunkirk. 

For the Great Landing, the Captains of the monitors alone knew the 
part of the coast that was to be attacked. Asa precaution a memorandum 
was issued to be read to the ships’ companies enjoining secrecy. It con- 
tained a statement: “since if the Germans knew a landing was to take 
place east of Zeebrugge, etc., etc. . . . it would be of the greatest value 
to them ” (the landing really being to the west of Ostend). Nothing, 
however minute, should be left undone in order to maintain secrecy of 
purpose. 

Now such parts of a scheme that can be rehearsed by units, may be done 
early without attracting attention ; for, generally, a sufficient but incorrect 
reason can be invented; but a general rehearsal should only be under- 
taken as near the time of the actual attempt as possible. ‘To what extent 
a rehearsal is necessary the Admiral alone can judge ; but, in any case, his 
preparations should, if possible, be such, and his orders so framed, as to 
make rehearsals unnecessary. 

Before the first Zeebrugge bombardment, when all the ships were 
newly commissioned and every one was new to the work, when a syn- 
chronised operation of dropping the tripods, mooring the ships, and fixing 

1 While endeavouring to keep secret the fact that a landing was contemplated, 


I was told my intention to use pontoons had been mentioned publicly in one of the 
London clubs. 


OPERATIONS 259 


their positions from each other and also from the shore was contemplated, 
a rehearsal was necessary. A full scale replica of the offing of Zeebrugge 
was therefore laid out in the Thames with buoys and shapes to represent 
the salient features ashore, compass-bearings and tide being arranged to be 
the same as the real attack. ‘The result was a very rapid opening fire and 
immediate commencement of spotting on the morning of the operation. 

For the Great Landing the monitors were interned up the Thames with 
their pontoons. I did not dare bring the latter away until the last moment, 
in case aeroplanes should spot them at Dunkirk. A general rehearsal, 
on a large scale, with models, was arranged for, but the orders were so 
framed as to make rehearsals almost unnecessary. 

When an operation is in course of preparation the Admiral should 
always have it present in his mind. He should place himself mentally 
in the position of the leader of each unit, and trace through the opera- 
tion from the point of view of the monitors, destroyers, paddle-mine- 
sweepers, motor launches, special service boats, etc., and frame his orders 
so that each leader exactly knows what to do at the right moment, and that 
he knows when that moment has arrived, either by bearing, distance run, 
signal, or what not. With models he has to see that at each point where 
signals are to be made that vision will not be obstructed by smoke-screen, 
etc. 

The questions of what units should do on sighting an enemy patrol, or 
should they lose touch in error or in thick weather ; the probable patrols 
that the enemy will have out, and what they may do; the line the enemy 
will adopt in defence or retaliation; all points of this nature for every 
unit of the Fleet require not only thinking over, but actual digestion and 
assimilation into a scheme ; always with full appreciation of the inky dark- 
ness of the night, and the inexperience in fleet working of many of the 
temporary officers. 

In all the firing operations undertaken after the autumn of 1915, aero- 
plane co-operation for spotting the burst of the shell was a necessity. 
For a dawn firing the ships, of course, had to start the evening before, 
but the aeroplanes only started an hour to three-quarters of an hour before 
the firing commenced. Whether spotting was possible depended on the 
absence of a ground mist, and also clouds below 13,000 feet, otherwise the 
target was obscured. A height of 13,000 feet was necessary on account of 
the anti-aircraft guns that the enemy had installed. In addition a frequent 
condition was absence of cloud, accompanied by a misty atmosphere 
hardly noticeable from the ground, but really forming a screen impene- 
trable to vision from high up in the air. Half an hour before the airmen 
started it was necessary to know if the conditions were favourable. Words 
were selected to be made by wireless telegraphy from Dover, which place 
was in telephonic communication with the aerodrome at Dunkirk, to say 
merely “‘ Yes” or “ No.” As signalling a code word on the morning 
of an attack might put the enemy on their guard on a future occasion 
when that code word might be used; every morning at an hour before 
dawn a dummy word having no significance, except on the real day, was 


260 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


signalled ; so that the fact of a word being made was no guide as to whether 
an attack would, or would not, take place. 

The same method was adopted in the evening to show whether the 
projected operation would take place the next day, or be abandoned owing 
to weather. If it were the correct word, then gradually, from all parts of 
the patrol, vessels would dribble in to the point of assembly. Another 
safeguard of secrecy was the prohibition of the use of any wireless tele- 
graphy signals after sailing to carry out an operation, except in the case of 
vital necessity. ‘The human race loves to chatter, and loquacity was apt 
to extend to wireless signals. If an operation had to be abandoned during 
the night a destroyer was sent off twenty miles from the Fleet to make the 
proper word, and her position was chosen so that it gave no indication that 
the Fleet had been out. 

In making reports by telephone or wireless telegraphy, great care should 
be taken to avoid using a mere negative, such as “‘ not,” “‘ unable,” “ im- 
possible,”’ since missing the word “ not,” or the dropping of the “ un,” or 
‘“‘im,”’ reverses the meaning. A phrasing such as ‘‘ weather is against 
spotting,” or ‘‘ weather is in favour of spotting,” is distinctly preferable. 
In the use of these no mistake can arise by an omission. ‘The following 
story is an example of the necessity for care in wording signals. 

There are two extreme classes of individuals as regards scandal; one, 
who if scandal is anywhere in the vicinity, is literally scorched by it, and the 
other, who can stand in a veritable gale and yet the faintest breath never 
touches him. To this class belonged one captain of a ship in the Patrol, 
and thereby hangs much of the piquancy of the tale. Arriving in Dover one 
day, this officer received signals from most of his brother captains inquir- 
ing about “ Annie,” and whether she was quite well, etc. etc. He was 
completely mystified, and probably is so to this day, but the whole Patrol 
was convulsed with mirth, and all through his want of care in wording a 
signal. He had been on detached work in the Thames with a drifter to 
work with him. Bad weather threatened, and as he was rather exercised 
about the safety of the drifter, he made a wireless signal to the Admiral 
which all the Patrol took in. The signal he should have made was: 
“Threatening to come on to blow; have arranged for the drifter to lay 
close to me for the night.” Want of care, however, made him mention 
merely the name of the drifter. Its name, as bad luck would have it, was 
the Girl Annie. 

All operations are timed by Greenwich mean time, and difficulties arise 
from confusion with British summer time. The fact that tide-tables and 
such works are in G.M.T. is probably the cause of this. It would be a 
convenience in war if British summer time were continued all the year 
round, and at the same time used in all publications. Once in repeating 
a signal to the patrol line, the important letters B.S.T. were left out, and 
the Prime Minister sailed from Calais without an escort.!_ He arrived off 


1 It might interest him to know that the inquiry fixed the blame on a boy 
telegraphist, who got six cuts with a cane. I generally mistrust blame that falls 
on the smallest, but in this case it was justified. 


OPERATIONS 261 


Dover after dark, and as he was in a packet-boat and unescorted, he was 
not allowed into Dover, as entry and egress after dark were forbidden 
except to men-of-war. He spent an uncomfortable half-hour, till the iden- 
tity of his craft was established, when he was allowed to enter. 

The use of shoals was at times valuable when having to navigate 
in waters that might have been mined. Of course, the Germans never 
mined the shoals, the mines would never have remained there, as the 
violent action of the sea in bad weather in shoal water causes the mines 
to break adrift. When possible, therefore, the ships were taken along them 
when there was sufficient height of tide. In the Great Landing when the 
state of the water off the enemy’s coast, so far as mines were concerned, 


ron NSS IBUOY | COAS 
(LAT 51° 30°N LONG 2° 50'E) 
OBTAINED BY HM SUBMARINE C17 ON 21-22 SEPTEMBER 117 


c 


This curve is interesting and shows three distinct high and low waters. 


was unknown (it would, of course, have attracted attention, if the waters 
had been explored beforehand), the course of the monitors was set right 
along the Nieuport bank. Care, however, had to be taken in estimating 
the depth of the water on the shoals away from the land. The tide- 
curve obtained by a submarine near No. 8 buoy on the patrol line showed 
that the rise there was eight feet instead of fourteen feet as at Zeebrugge and 
Ostend. A miscalculation was, therefore, easy. Hydrographic information 
regarding the waters among the shoals was naturally very scanty, 
and we compiled much useful information by constant tidal observation 
being made by the ships on patrol. 

It is necessary to make out, in advance, the most comprehensive time- 
tables for passing buoys or marks, so that progress can be checked. To 
leave anything in the way of calculation to the moment of execution is 


262 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


radically unsound. It is worth days of work beforehand to ensure accuracy 
at the critical moment, even in a small detail. 

In operations generally, discrimination is required as to which should be 
undertaken and which not attempted. Chance of success is by no means 
the only factor. The utility of the operation in furthering the War is one 
of the chief considerations. Any operation which serves no really useful 
end should be treated with great suspicion. It cannot be too fully appreci- 
ated that the enemy learns much from all attacks, especially those made ona 
coast-line or harbour. Such attacks reveal weak points to him and give his 
patrols experience, cause him to put on extra patrols, and afford strong 
arguments to back up his demands to his Government to be supplied with 
additional vessels or batteries. So that, to a great extent, the more an 
enemy is worried without adequate reason, the stronger he becomes, and 
the greater the difficulty of subsequently carrying out important schemes 
against him. 

To quote two instances. The attack by our coastal motor boats by 
firing torpedoes against the inside of the Mole at Zeebrugge at the spot 
where the destroyers usually lay, merely resulted in the Germans laying 
an obstruction to close the harbour to attack from the eastward. The 
attack was made to give the coastal boat officers and crew a little diversion, 
and let off some of their accumulated zeal ; but it was a mistake. I ought 
never to have arranged it. Again the firing on the Tirpitz battery from the 
12-inch gun landed at Adenkerke, although it damaged the emplacements 
and probably put two guns temporarily out of action, merely resulted in 
better protection being built to the magazines and the erection of more 
traverses. It was useful and necessary to arrive at data for subsequent 
bombardments. But after these had been obtained, no more rounds were 
fired, the guns being kept ready for the day when an advance along the 
coast would be made. If in the bombardments preparatory to the main 
attack, the Tirpitz guns had been temporarily knocked out, the necessary 
repairs would probably not have been made in time to bring them into 
action to harass our advance ; but firing at other times merely gave the 
Germans gratuitous information as to their points of weakness. 

Our national recreations being largely of a sporting nature, the people 
of the country applaud, during a war, constant action on the part of 
Admirals and Generals. It is difficult for them to grasp that apparent 
inactivity is often wiser than a multitude of flashy operations, and that 
winning the war is far more important than the supply of dramatic incidents 
to be read at the morning breakfast-table. How often was not the remark 
made in the recent War: “ So and so 1s a good fellow, he keeps the enemy 
busy.”” Busy doing what? In nine cases out of ten this busyness con- 
sisted of the enemy being given the opportunity of learning his own weak 
points and taking steps to strengthen them. I was warned that the long 
period of seeming inactivity, while waiting for the day of the Great 
Landing, was making the country restive; but I replied that I was not 
going to endanger the success of an important operation to satisfy the 
craving of the nation for exciting news. 


OPERATIONS 263 


No more disagreeable or difficult duty exists for an Admiral than having 
to cancel operations. It requires far more determination to cancel an 
operation, when once the ships have started, than to carry it out. But facts 
are facts, and nothing is more futile than to persist in carrying out plans 
when the conditions are adverse. Several times we steamed with the 
whole squadron across the North Sea to Zeebrugge, and then had to turn 
back when close to our firing position because the atmospheric conditions 
were against us. The same happened as regards Ostend. Four times we 
sailed and turned back, and the fifth time we brought it off. Patience 
was necessary to get the best results, but probably the hardest duty I had 
to perform during the whole period of my command was to turn back on 
the fourth time on each of these occasions. On such nights every pre- 
caution had to be taken to prevent the enemy knowing that the attempt 
had been made, so that by daybreak the ships had to be dispersed, in 
case a vagrant aeroplane might see the fleet together in an unwonted spot, 
and ge draw deductions and cause the enemy to increase his 
patrols. 

The same applied to air attacks. After objectives had been bombed 
several times, anti-aircraft guns appeared in their vicinity, which made 
future bombing more difficult. Hence in the earlier days of the War, 
when machines were few, it was a better policy to wait and collect a fair 
number of machines, bomb the place heavily and continuously for nights 
in succession, and then leave it alone for a spell. 

Not only did guns crop up, but duplications of important adjuncts 
were also installed by the enemy. For instance, if a railway junction were 
bombed, duplicate signals would be put up so as to provide alternatives. 
In fact, spasmodic bombing frequently resulted in the education of the 
enemy. The best course was to leave all such places alone, until an 
advance was in progress, and then, and not till then, bomb them, when the 
full disadvantage of the damage done would be felt by the enemy, and the 
advantage caused by dislocation of his traffic would accrue to us. 

The value to an Admiral of uncertainty on the part of his enemy is 
considerable. Surmise may be strong enough to be almost convincing, 
but this cannot be compared with actual knowledge. Prisoners when 
examined may, or may not, speak the truth ; and therefore actual know- 
ledge from photographs or some indisputable evidence is of greater value. 

Another form of uncertainty which may assist operations is to create 
apprehensions which in reality have no foundation. For instance mines 
were devised, largely owing to experimental skill of Admiral of the Fleet 
Sir A. Wilson, for dropping from aeroplanes into the canals in Belgium 
during an advance. If one or two barges had been sunk by this means it 
would only have been necessary in future to send an aeroplane to drop 
stones in the canals, or even to fly low over them, to cause the enemy to 
stop traffic and sweep. Thus delays in the passage of ammunition would 
have been occasioned. 

Inference is again another weapon. When the Great Landing was 
projected, arrangements were made to accumulate trawlers and drifters 


264 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


off Dunkirk in full view of the enemy’s scouts. He would have had two 
lines of argument, either that we were repeating our scare of 1916, and 
that it was only a blind, or that if a landing was indeed contemplated, 
it would be inside a harbour, as the considerable draught of water of these 
vessels rendered them useless for a coast landing. Napoleon’s foresight 
in openly shipping saddles in the French battleships at Toulon led Nelson 
to sail to Alexandria and so to miss the French fleet after they had put 
to sea; for, in reality, it was bound for the West Indies. An Admiral 
should miss no opportunity of strengthening his plans by such minor 
deceits ; since the cumulative effect of several such whispers will probably 
lead the enemy to incorrect conclusions. 

The information that may be gathered by an experienced enemy inter- 
rogator in conversation with an unwary prisoner should not be under- 
valued. As an example of this, no vessels in the patrol except one or two 
destroyers, ever knew that I was using submarines instead of light-buoys 
on the Goodwin-Snou barrage, since if one of our small vessels had been 
snapped up by the enemy on a dark night, the Germans might have 
obtained full information of the scheme, which might have led to our 
submarines being sunk. A guiding principle should be only to impart 
information to those directly concerned of any project that may be under 
consideration. 

It is, of course, obvious never to make any detailed reconnaissance by 
photography of the place where an operation is projected without bestow- 
ing similar, if not more, attention on other spots. When photographing 
the Belgian coast to obtain the slope of the beach, the whole length of the 
coast was covered by our machines. This was of value both in putting the 
enemy off the scent, as well as those ingenious persons among our own 
people who were apt to put two and two together. 

Never neglect any precaution that does not complicate a plan. It is 
impossible to be too careful when over-care does not matter. Attention 
to this often saves you from thinking afterwards what a fool you were. 
But excess of caution should never be allowed to vitiate a plan. In anchor- 
ing on a possible mine-field always get stern way on before letting go the 
anchor, since, if the anchor strikes a mine before reaching the bottom, 
the bow will have receded from the mine instead of having approached 
it. This was our universal practice when anchoring for bombarding, since 
the most convenient spot for firing from was the one most likely to be 
mined. This is a good example of a small precaution which was always 
adopted but never actually required. 

We gave up sweeping in front of the fleet at night, since the German 
mine was as dangerous floating as moored. The mines cut adrift could 
not be seen and sunk, and, unless the sweepers were far ahead of the 
vessels, the warning given by a mine exploding in the sweep would be too 
late to enable the vessels to avoid the mine-field. It was necessary to 
determine before starting what to do if mines were discovered, whether 
to go on, or round, or go back. ‘Taking the shoals and other troubles 
into account I came to the conclusion it was safer at night to go on, and 


OPERATIONS . 265 


sO gave up sweeping ahead. Of course we always swept ahead of the 
Belgian coast patrol in the early morning as they had both time and room 
in which to avoid mine-fields, and daylight by which to see the mines. 

One important point which was brought home forcibly to me was 
never to mine an area in which, or bordering on which, future operations 
might take place. On one occasion in the winter of 1915, when I had 
reason to believe that submarines were passing close to the north-east 
end of the Cliffe Island Bank, I mined that area ; this proved a considerable 
nuisance and bothered me more than the enemy, as the mine-field had been 
laid by the destroyers at night in order that the enemy should not observe 
the laying; this was the first mine-field laid off the coast, and, as at 
that time we were not practised in such laying, the limits of its position 
were doubtful, which accentuated the trouble. Always take the greatest 
care to fix the position of a mine-field when laying it, since it is probable 
that it may be desired at some future date to lay more mines near those 
already placed. The mine-fields shown in the Chart of the Patrol at z 
are examples of this progressive laying. 

The senior officer of the escort, and also of the mine-layers were always 
required to send in separate reports, after the conclusion of the laying 
of a mine-field, as to the position of the mines. In cases where a dis- 
crepancy existed the mine-field was charted to cover both positions. 
Extreme care and judgment are required in mining areas in successive 
laying operations. The whole scheme should be got out and the laying 
planned with due regard to the difficulties that the boats will experience 
in the successive stages in finding their positions and laying in safety. It 
may appear simple to do this, but it is not, since not a mark must show 
nor a vessel be seen in the vicinity of the mine-field at daybreak. 

The Germans were past-masters in the art of laying mines in accurately 
charted positions and of never laying them in any water in which they 
themselves were likely to operate. But they carried this too far. They 
turned a guiding principle into a law, which is always a mistake. They 
could have worried me much more if they had allowed themselves a little 
more latitude in these matters ; for with experience I was able to discover 
this law. 

A certain amount of misconception exists as to the extent to which a 
sea force can directly assist with its armament an army operating on the 
coast. Obviously it should protect the army’s flank from a sea attack. 
It can employ its armament to bombard back areas where reserves can 
be accumulated, and can also disturb communications. In fact, its 
heavy armament is about as useful as efficient guns mounted on railway 
mountings ashore. The extent to which it can enfilade trenches depends 
on the defences that the enemy has installed, and the nature of the coast, 
and on the range at which it can operate. The advantage of enfilading is 
merely that, since direction of fire is more accurate than length of range, 
““ overs ” or “ shorts ’”’ matter little and a greater percentage of rounds 
tell on the enemy. But during an advance such an operation is practically 
impossible unless the exact position of our own troops can be seen because 


266 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


of the difficulties of communication both between the front line and head- 
quarters and headquarters and the ships. At times bodies of the enemy 
may be visible and harassed, but these conditions are sporadic and cannot 
be counted on. 

Ships should never attack shore batteries of equal or superior fire, 
except for special reasons. In bombarding, shoot at the thing you wish 
to destroy and never worry about shooting at the batteries protecting it. 
The reasons for this are fairly obvious. The vulnerable area of a vessel, 
say for example a 12-inch monitor, is 1800 square feet. With a shell 
with a delay percussion fuse descending at 45 degrees and striking any- 
where within this area the monitor should be sunk, since the bottom of 
the monitor is only ten feet below water and therefore very near to the 
upper deck. The only parts of a shore battery that are really vulnerable 
are the gun and its mountings. The turn-tables of a gun battery are, say, 
thirty feet in diameter, or present each a target of 225 square feet. The 
gun positions are invariably disposed so that each is a safe distance from 
the next, allowing for a reasonable error in shooting. At all events, not 
more than two positions should form a target to a given round. The 
vulnerable areas as between monitor and battery are as 1800 to 450, and, 
added to this, if a gun position is hit only one gun and not the whole 
battery is placed out of action. The chance of putting out of action all 
four positions is at least four times as great as that of putting out a single 
position. Hence two monitors, each with two guns, would have a four to 
one chance of being sunk before putting all the guns of a four-gun battery 
out of action even if other things were equal. 

But other factors are not equal. Range-finding from the shore is much 
easier and more accurate than from the ship. Local aeroplanes for spotting 
have a shorter distance to fly, and should be available in greater numbers. 
The guns on land, moreover, can be laid accurately by clinometer. All 
these factors tell. Ifthe ships remain under way they are less likely to be 
hit, but their chance of hitting the battery is likewise diminished. It is 
a fool’s game to wear out guns by shooting at batteries unless there is 
some special definite purpose for so doing. Shooting at the battery will 
not reduce its rate of fire much, as the crew can take shelter by local signal, 
arranged by observing the flash of the ships’ guns,} and in the interval 
can serve the guns. It is far better to shoot at the real objective than to 
vias valuable time shooting at a battery which you know you cannot 

estroy. 

Friendly submarines are always liable to be a source of anxiety as they 
may be mistaken for enemy boats. In daylight ours were always escorted, 
as the escort acted as a guarantee, but if through fog or other reasons 
they were unable to turn up in the morning at their rendezvous to meet 
the escort they had to lie submerged for the day. It was of great import- 
ance that every destroyer and airman should instantly attack every sub- 

1 In our case, at least fifty-six seconds elapsed between their seeing our flash 


and the shell arriving. Ninety-four seconds elapsed between seeing the smoke of 
one of the Tirpitz battery guns and the arrival of the shell on the patrol line. 


OPERATIONS 267 


marine sighted without the slightest arriére pensée as to recognition signals, 
etc. The same applied to patrols. The great advantage the Germans had 
in a raid was that they knew that everything they saw was an enemy. 
There never was any question with them as to challenging; they could 
fire with guns or torpedoes at everything they met, for they had nothing 
at sea in our waters. With us it was different. In the early days when 
we had only a few destroyers our units had to be spread about in 
order to observe the entrance of the Channel. This necessitated our 
destroyers challenging before firing. Eventually, as increased number of 
destroyers became available, I was able to concentrate units and assign 
them definite areas to work in, so that each unit was separated from the 
next without any possibility of their meeting. This concentration affected 
adversely the observation of the Channel against commerce raiders break- 
ing through ; but, by this time, the danger of commerce raiders had largely 
passed. Every disposition of this nature must be of a nature of a compro- 
mise. The Admiral has to decide which interest to guard, which to neglect, 
and it is here that experience of the locality, and also of the temper of the 
enemy, is of the greatest value. 

Experience |! Everything centres and should gyrate round this essential. 
Nothing can give it but by the sweat of operations, the vigils of nights in 
the open, surrounded by the units of the fleet. The analysis of little 
incidents that occur, resolves taken at the moment, regrets for omissions, 
and all the thousand and one things that happen, that just did not happen, 
and that might have happened, things that lie dormant in the brain until 
some occasion arises, then out they flash to direct or stay action. The time 
to say ‘‘ Yea”; the occasion on which to refuse ; the moment to go full 
speed ; the time to stop; when to change a plan with all the concomitant 
evils of change; when rigidly to adhere to it; the phosphorescence of the 
water, the tide rips suddenly met with, all have their responding memories 
in the brain of the Admiral and give him information on which to act. 

A reported activity of barges on the canals may necessitate an alteration 
of plans, and the drawing of vessels defensively to the left flank of the 
Army. The absence of barbed wire or defensive works at a certain spot 
cheers him, with absolute certainty that his plans have not been suspected 
by the enemy. 

When arranging operations for destroyers their wash, when steaming 
at speed, especially in shallow water, should be visualised. ‘Twice I have 
seen collisions solely due to the wash of the boat ahead when turning. 
The speed of operations in shallow water at night was therefore regulated 
accordingly. 

Remember, rapidity of decision is often of vital necessity. Make it at 
once, and console yourself with the thought that, if two lines of action 
require very close examination, generally it matters not which is pursued. 
To weigh too closely is merely to provoke indecision ; and indecision is 
generally worse than the second best of two lines of action. But train 
yourself to decide quickly by constant and prolonged previous thought 
on the operation. 


268 ‘THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


When making out orders for operations decide whether they, or part of 
them, are to be adhered to at all hazards; or which portions may be 
modified or abandoned by the senior officer as circumstances may arise. 
Usually the latter obtains. When this is the case, preface the orders with 
a note to the effect that there is nothing 1n these orders to prevent the 
senior officer present taking such action as, owing to weather or other 
conditions, may be requisite for the safety of the vessels under him. 
This is most necessary, as officers are accustomed to adhere rigidly to 
orders, although by so doing they may risk their vessels; and very 
frequently the particular operation is quite unimportant compared with 
the safety of the vessels. 

This was brought home to me vividly when on one occasion destroyers 
were detached to watch the waters close to the Dutch coast; which, as 
will be seen by reference to the Chart of the Patrol, took them in close 
proximity to the eastern mine-fields. A very heavy gale sprang up 
unexpectedly, and I dared not communicate by wireless telegraphy as it 
would have betrayed their position. The officer in command, Commander 
Edwards of the Botha, was fairly new to the Patrol, and I did not know 
if he was already familiar with my views as regards officers exercising their 
individual discretion as fully as those who had been longer with me. 
Fortunately he made for the English coast and got out of a dangerous 
position ; but the orders I had given him would fully have justified his 
remaining, and I spent a regretful night. After this a paragraph giving 
discretion to the local senior officer was always embodied in orders. 

Two relations are absolutely essential between the Admiral and officers 
under him; the first, that the senior officer should act as his judgment 
may dictate in accordance with the spirit of his orders. He is there, 
present on the spot, and is the only person with full knowledge. The 
Admiral may think that he would have acted differently ; but then he 
was not there to judge at the moment. The second is that, however an 
officer in such a position acts, provided he is not culpably to blame, 
and however much the Admiral may differ from his judgment, it is the 
business of the latter to support him. He need not employ him as senior 
officer again on detached duty, if in his opinion he is unfitted; but, by 
selecting him on that occasion, the Admiral assumed responsibility for his 
action. It is better to foster this confidence than to create a feeling among 
officers that their independent action will not be backed up, for it is 
important to encourage officers fearlessly to exercise their judgment as 
unforeseen circumstances arise. One thing, among many that experience 
teaches, is that no one brain can foresee the many things that may unex- 
pectedly happen. ‘The great asset on such occasions is the ready exercise 
of the independent action on the part of the senior officer present, and this 
can best be fostered in officers by complete knowledge that their action 
will be supported. 

I have never forgotten a case that happened years ago when Admiral 
Sir Arthur Wilson commanded a fleet and had worked out an elaborate 
search scheme for trial. The ships separated, thousands of tons of coal 


OPERATIONS 269 


were burnt and much time was expended; then the whole trial failed 
through one officer misreading his orders. The only comment made by 
the Admiral to the Captains was, that it showed the necessity of scrupulous 
care in studying orders; and, “ we will try again.” Patience is a great 
virtue. I have in mind two cases which nearly induced me to break the 
rule laid down, but I am glad I did not. 

There is one thing that an admiral should always guard against; he 
should see that the constant wear of incessant brain exertion does not 
tend to make him over-anxious, and so cause him to exercise too great a 
care in providing against actions on the part of the enemy which may be 
remote, while the orders issued to avoid these hypothetical occurrences 
involve undue work on the officers and men under him. There is a happy 
mean in these matters, where risk must be run in order to save increase of 
daily or nightly work to already hard-worked crews; or when subsidiary 
risks are incurred to the matériel under him, which subsidiary risks may be 
in reality more dangerous than the risk it is intended to avert. I do not 
wish to convey that an admiral should be the victim of over-introspection, 
but he should be careful to examine fully such matters from the point of 
view of those who have to carry out the new orders, and balance their 
labours and the risks to matériel, against the probability of the enemy’s 
action, and the damage such action would entail. I will quote one 
example : 

In 1917 I gave an order that no transport was to lie alongside the pier 
at Folkestone on dark nights. This involved considerable extra work on 
a large number of persons and incidental risk of collision to the transports, 
owing to the crowded state of Dover and the Downs ; but the consequence 
of a successful torpedo raid by destroyers would have been so far-reaching 
that the order was necessary. If other vessels had been available to replace 
those unique ships, the risk of having them sunk would not have been 
worth the increased hours of work to all concerned. To me this was 
always an interesting case as the pros and cons were fairly evenly balanced, 
but the issues on both sides were considerable. 

It is of the utmost importance to impress on all officers the necessity 
for training themselves for instant action by visualising events that may 
occur. ‘Take, for instance, a destroyer captain when on deck on a dark 
night ; let us suppose that he suddenly asks himself what he would do if 
he sighted a destroyer three points on his bow. A multitude of doubtful 
questions immediately arise. Should he challenge ? Which way is she 
steering ? Challenge not answered, should he alter course to starboard 
or port ? Should he reverse a propeller ? Should he fire his gun? If so, 
foremost or after ? Should he fire a torpedo or should he challenge again ? 
Should he try toram? Andsoon. Every sort of question floods on his 
mind. If he has educated himself by considering many such sudden 
problems in his leisure time, his ideas will have become ordered and 
arranged, so that instant decisions become a habit. Of course the event 
that actually happens will probably not be one that he has visualised, but 
it will be analogous, therefore his ordered brain will deal with it promptly. 


270 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


All officers in independent positions, or who may be called on to occupy 
independent positions, should study this self-education. The dictionary 
definition of “‘ experience” is incomplete: for experience is not only 
** practical acquaintance with any matter gained by trial,’’ but it is that 
practical acquaintance digested or ruminated over until the whole of its 
golden grain is separated from the chaff. 

Another point that requires considerable attention in peace time is to 
adjust peace ideas to war conditions. Opportunities of carrying out active 
operations at sea occur but rarely in war, and no trouble, no thought, 
is too great to expend on what may be the one and only chance of a life- 
time, and this should be extended when considering materiel. It was 
extraordinary how difficult it was to inspire certain departments with the 
real, live, and vital fact that the War was the one great incident in the life- 
time of millions of lives. Committees, and others not in contact with the 
sea, were apt to view the War much as they would an important annual 
manceuvre, instead of an epoch of intense importance, when all considera- 
tions except those which directly bore on the ardent prosecution of the 
War should be swept aside. Witness the refusal to appoint Captain 
Bowring, and then Captain Evans, as Chief of my Staff because of some 
musty precedent ; the fight I had to get my captain in charge of destroyers 
accommodated in his office, ready at night for instant call. What I call the 
“* intense ”’ feeling is rarely felt in an office, unless the head is an enthusiast. 
I might mention the late Mr. M. M. Waller, Director of Stores at the 
Admiralty, as a brilliant exception. Committees sitting in offices deal 
with the paper aspect, not the live aspect, of vital matters; they do not 
handle actualities, they dabble in abstract propositions. 

That an Operation Committee may have uses at the Admiralty there 
is little doubt, but its uses should be confined to two purposes; one to 
examine proposed operations in regions not directly under a Naval com- 
mand, and secondly to provide a section through which special stores can 
be ordered, and their progress watched without their ultimate destination 
being divulged. For an Operations Committee to attempt to make 
detailed plans for any operation for the guidance of the Naval commander 
of an area 1s absolute folly. It can possess no special local knowledge 
unless its members are serving in the locality concerned ; their experience is 
merely that of the ordinary Naval officer. Their experience is merely that 
gained in peace time by the tactical handling of vessels in peace time, and 
strategical ideas culled mainly from the extraordinarily able writings of 
Mahan. No admiral would follow such plans ; they therefore become waste 
paper. But if the Admiralty purpose some new expedition in a locality where 
no Naval officer is present, then the Operations Committee can pull out 
charts, compasses, and protractors, and make a skeleton scheme which will 
indicate the materiel and personnel probably necessary. Again, however, 
everything will depend on the flesh and blood that will clothe the skeleton, 
and they must come from the man who ultimately finds himself in 
command. 


A department at the Admiralty designed to carry out the wishes of an 


OPERATIONS : 271 


admiral after his schemes are approved, and which will wholeheartedly 
undertake the departmental work of ordering material, would be a 
valuable institution ; but it should be distinctly understood that it must 
carry out his views and not its own. 

There is one other use of committees, and that is to force an admiral to 
resign. I will make a few quotations from my diary to illustrate my point. 
The first is on December 7th, 1917, after I had been in command and 
perfect harmony with the Admiralty under three successive First Lords 
and three successive First Sea Lords for two years and eight months. 

“‘If the Admiralty are going to try and run operations in this area 
there will be no room for me.” 

“* December gth, I must have a clear understanding whether I run the 
Patrol, or an irresponsible committee.” 

““December 15th. All day answering the Admiralty letter re mine 
barrage.! It is getting beyond a joke. All my time taken up writing un- 
necessary letters because they have now half a dozen fifth wheels to the 
coach. What used to be settled by the First Sea Lord and by me is now 
meddled with by a Barrage Committee and Deputy First Sea Lord. 
All tommy rot.” 

These show how dangerous it is to have committees away from practical 
touch with the Command, working at headquarters and yet trying to 
assume executive control; they cannot fail to make the position of the 
Admiral impossible. 

Let me, in conclusion, emphasise the salient points. 

War is war, and not a peace mancuvre. 

Experience can only be gained by long contact with realities, by the sweat 
of constant and prolonged thought, by the assimilation of hundreds of 
small incidents, by daily contact with the actual waters, with the peculi- 
arities of the opposing forces, the blackness of the night, and by intimate 
knowledge of the locality, the performance of each ship, and the individu- 
ality of the officers in command. 

The value of experience is never appreciated till its absence in others is 
noticed. 

Committees and excellent and well-meaning persons serving in offices 
away from an area cannot gain experience and generally do not appreciate 
its need. Those who hold high office have the power to override the de- 
cision of admirals in command who have experience, but such action 
should be exercised in war time with a care that is independent of every 
thought but the good of the country. They have the power, but they have 
not the right to exercise it, except under that one condition, and it is for 
them eventually to show to the nation that their action has been justified 
by subsequent events. 


1 It should be remembered that the Folkestone barrage was submitted by me 
and approved in February 1917, but mines were not available till November. 
The scheme for lightships and patrols was completed in September, and it was 
not till the end of November that the First Lord appointed a Barrage Committee, 
who at once tried to exercise executive functions. 


272 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Anyone can carry out an operation, but the art in so doing consists in 
foreseeing and forestalling difficulties, so that, when the time arrives, its 
execution is almost automatic, and the cost in life and material is as low as 
possible. When this happens it appears to have been so simple an affair 
that there has been nothing remarkable done since practically no losses 
have been incurred. But if one single point of importance had been over- 
looked a bad hang-up might have occurred. An operation thus hampered 
might appear a far more gallant and glorious affair than if the particular 
trouble had been foreseen and forestalled. 

A war should not be run for the benefit of the reputation of an admiral 
or his officers ; he should therefore be careful that he does not undertake 
brilliant operations which have no effect on winning the war, and may even, 
if successful, be deleterious to more important future actions. Such small 
undertakings may keep him in the public eye and enhance his popular 
reputation, but they should be strenuously resisted although the temptation 
may be great. 

Fighting in modern times should largely be controlled by the brain. 
The old bull-at-the-gate methods are those which lose a war and do not 
win it. They are magnificent and make splendid reading ; but they do not 
pay. There is a tendency to judge of an achievement by the extent of the 
losses and the gallantry of those engaged in it. This should not be. A 
difficult operation may, with foresight and forestalling, be carried out with 
few losses, whereas a more simple one lightly undertaken may be expensive 
in lives and materiel, and therefore may appear to be a far greater achieve- 
ment. 

When forethought forestalls a disaster, or minimises loss of life, that 
fact is rarely appreciated, because no criterion exists by which to judge 
results. A non-happening occurrence is non-existent and therefore un- 
known. Whereas a disaster is often so spectacular that it appeals to our 
emotions. The charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava is a classic example 
of an incident that should never have happened receiving national applause. 

Experience 1s, as I have before remarked, so subtle, that it is rarely 
appreciated even by those who possess it, until they see the lack of it in 
others. Does a mechanic appreciate his experience in using a tool, 
until he sees an apprentice file a square round and a round oval ? 

Take the above notes ; probably we all appreciate their abstract truth, 
but can they and a hundred kindred others be ingrained in the mind of 
those who stay ashore and have no longer the benefit of active work, at 
sea day and night, and absolutely constant wrestling with problems which 
are not abstract propositions, but matters of life and death ? 

When the Admiralty wished to relieve me, they would have been well 
advised to have sent my successor to Dover, to work under me for three 
months.?_ I would willingly have welcomed him and put him on the 
Belgian Coast Patrol line to learn the work, study the problems, and gain 
that experience by life and contact with brains inured to the daily work 


1 I volunteered, after I had been relieved, to remain at Dover as Chief of the 
Staff to my successor. He perhaps wisely refused the suggestion. 


a = 


OPERATIONS 273 


of that area. Without egotism I am convinced I could have taught him 
much, not from any superior knowledge of our profession, but from my 
experience of the Dover area, for, with all his proved gallantry, nothing 
can supplant experience. However, a new and inexperienced Admiralty 
decided otherwise, and the heavy casualty list at the Mole landing to 
achieve results, and the inability to find Ostend were results that anyone 
could have forecasted, and for which that Admiralty must be held 
responsible. 

In fact, the preparation of successful operations requires two things : 
imagination and experience. Without imagination, that is, a flight of 
thought that enables one to conceive methods more original than the 
obvious and ordinary, operations become as dead bones, and merely a trial 
of strength against strength with a consequent considerable loss of lives. 
Imagination may originate methods which, from their element of surprise, 
may cause, metaphorically, the walls of Jericho to fall, and great ends to be 
achieved at small costs. Imagination should be tempered by experience, 
that is, the cream of past events analysed and sifted by thought. The two 
should go hand in hand and supplement and enrich each other. 

My advice to all about to devise operations is, never do the obvious, and 
never cease thinking of the details, think, think, think; think round a 
scheme, thought alone can bring success, and eliminate troubles which 
without deep thought are certain to occur. 


EXPERIENCE 


Keep thy counsel, so that in thy planning, by few may thy secrets be known. 
Rumour spreads, like the circles on water by heedlessly dropping a stone. 


Keep thy eye on the matters essential, mistake not the milk for the cream, 
Let no points that are minor eclipse them, however seductive they seem. 


Discard in thy plannings the obvious, the impossible strive to achieve, 
Half the battle is won before starting, if plannings the foeman deceive. 


If his harbours thy ship routes o’ershadow, make use both of darkness and light. 
Pass your vessels of value in daytime, the raider excelleth at night. 


Use mechanics and science to aid thee, strain both to their end for thy good, 

For machines may contrive to accomplish far more than mere flesh and mere 
blood. 

If two courses seem evenly balanced, choose quickly and choose either way, 

For either will bring less disservice, than marks indecision’s delay. 

Having chosen a man for some duty, his actions thou may’st not disown 

If his judgment should fail in performance, the blame, like the choice, is thine 


own. 


Operations plan not for thine honour, to dazzle the popular eye, 
Essentials alone are the purpose for which thou may’st call men to die. 


Experience must be thy standby, thine anchor, thy compass, thy log, 
Tull it’s thine, thy achievements resemble the making of land in a fog. 


Let thy brain never cease meditation, all doings without it are nought, 
In war time success’s main structure, from truck to the keelson, is thought. 


274 


CHAPTER XVI 
THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL 


The origin of the Air Force—Credit due to Mr. Winston Churchill—The original 
types—Their shortcomings—Photography—Destruction of Zeppelins— 
Various attacks—Destruction of Dunkirk aerodrome—Difficulties on patrol— 
Airships—Destruction of enemy kite balloon—Work with Army in France— 
Advantages of aeroplanes over seaplanes at Dunkirk—Bombing—The value 
of good observers—Work of the Air Department. 


but a very shadowy sketch of the work of the R.N.A.S. attached to 
the Dover Patrol. The Official History of the Air Force during the 
War must be consulted for further detail. 

Starting from a very small beginning of three squadrons only, primarily 
charged with the destruction of Zeppelins, the Dunkirk force rose gradually 
as its duties developed, until, at the end of 1917, it reached the following 
impressive total : 


I: is impossible to give, within the limits of a short chapter, anything 


8 squadrons of Fighting planes. 
4 es Handley-Page machines. 
a Daylight bombers. 


I as Photographic and reconnaissance. 
I 3 Training for fighters. 

I ee Training for bombers. 

6 large seaplanes. 


The Dunkirk force not only aided the Navy in protecting their patrol 
and spotting for bombardments, but systematically bombed the German 
bases and batteries ; and, still further, supplied our Army in France with 
several squadrons of fighting machines during the advances in 1916 and 
1917. 

When the War started, our abandonment of rigid airship construction 
had left us without any practical form of airship ; and, with the exception 
of the S.S., or small airship, we had no aircraft lighter than air during the 
greater part of the War. Thanks, however, to the energy of Mr. Winston 
Churchill, we had created aeroplanes, seaplanes, and a Royal Naval Air 
Service, in spite, it is commonly credited, of considerable opposition on the 
part of the majority of the Board of Admiralty. Mr. Churchill, with great 
prevision and insight into the requirements of the future, gave consistent 
support to Captain Murry Sueter and the other officers associated with 
him, and great credit is due to him for the fact that we were able to carry 
out, with success, operations off the Belgian coast during the War. 


275 


276 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Early in 1915, R.N.A.S. units were formed for work in connection with 
the Dover Patrol. These consisted of about a dozen land-machines at 
St. Pol, Dunkirk, and a similar number at Guston Road Aerodrome at 
Dover. The seaplane base at Dover was installed and equipped with four 
or five machines. The stations for small airships at Polegate and Capel 
were commenced, and the Riviera seaplane carrier was attached to the 
command. 

The air force attached to the Dover Patrol soon expanded rapidly in 
numbers and efficiency. It is well to remember how vastly inferior 
in 1915 the machines and their equipment were to those in use at the end 
of the War. The difficulties attending the use of aircraft in those days 
were great. Machines were largely unreliable; they carried no defensive 
weapon except rifles and shot-guns ; their wireless was inefficient, and no 
co-ordinated system of spotting was in existence which could be used by 
the bombarding ships off the Belgian coast. 

The original offensive weapon of aircraft was the bomb. The only types 
of these which were available in the early days were the 10- and 20-pound 
Hales. Then in 1915 came the 65-pound and 100-pound bombs. Only 
limited numbers of bombs were available in the early days of the War. 
So scarce were they, and the demand for them was so keen, that pilots 
generally took their allowance to bed with them on the night preceding 
a raid, to prevent other keen competitors from stealing them during the 
dark hours ! 

The methods of discharging bombs were crude, for sighting appliances 
were practically non-existent. 

The offensive weapons against aircraft were both various and primitive, 
ranging from automatic pistols to rifles of various calibres and 12-bore 
guns firing incendiary bullets, buck-shot, and even chain-shot. 

Early in 1916 a marked improvement took place in all equipment. 
Lewis guns began to arrive in numbers, but their mountings were crude ; 
and it was not until the supply of the guns provided experience from which 
to manufacture the most practical and suitable forms of mounting, that 
the aeroplane became armed in a really efficient manner. 

The gun itself, as first supplied, was by no means a success; the 
method of shifting the cartridge-tray and the number of cartridges which 
it held were unsatisfactory. But the worst defect was the trouble experi- 
enced owing to the oil freezing and stopping the functioning of the gun. 
I remember one occasion when five of our machines met an enemy patrol 
over Ostend, and all had to return after firing very few rounds, each pilot 
greeting the other on landing with the same remark : “‘ Could you not see 
that my gun was jammed! Why the dickens didn’t you chip in?” 
Eventually a good non-freezing oil was evolved. 

Wireless telegraphy, one of the most useful of the adjuncts to aeroplane 
equipment, was, to begin with, unsatisfactory and unreliable. As can well 
be imagined, the original installation of wireless in an aeroplane was no 
simple matter ; reduction in weight was important, the space was limited, 
vibration was excessive, and the noise outrageous. However, by the 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL 277 


devotion of much time and labour to the various problems, communication 
eventually became reliable. 

Aerial photography in its earlier days was perfectly useless. The 
photographs revealed a general view of nothing in particular and were 
quite valueless for reconnaissance or recognition work. The installation 
of anti-aircraft guns by the enemy forced the machines up to higher 
altitudes and eliminated any advantages which had been gained by 
improvements that had been introduced in our cameras. As the French 
and the Belgians were obtaining better results than we did with our 
machines, I sent for the Head of the photographic section at Dunkirk, 
gave him a blank cheque on my banking account, and told him to go to 
London and buy the very best lens that he could find. He returned and 
reported that he had found one costing £120, which he would test. During 
a second visit he did still better and unearthed in a cellar two 8-inch lenses 
of about 37-inch focal length. These we bought! and I suggested that 
they should be mounted by building a fixed camera pointing through the 
bottom of the chassis of the machine. This was at once taken in hand at 
Dunkirk. The amusing part of the story is that when the Admiralty 
official responsible for photographic appliances saw the lenses he remarked : 
“I had no idea you required anything like that.”’ It is very difficult for 
headquarters to keep in touch with the rapidly advancing requirements 
of war units at the front. 

Soon the advantage of these large-scale photographs, taken through a 
hole cut in the floor of the fuselage without the necessity of the observer 
holding the camera and leaning over the side, became so obvious that all 
the small cameras were returned to England and large, fixed cameras were 
built at Dunkirk as soon as suitable lenses could be found and purchased. 
The original cameras were used by No. 2 Squadron R.N.A.S., right up 
to the signing of the armistice; and, although every new type of aerial 
camera was sent out as it became available, many of which were extremely 
good, nothing was received that justified the scrapping of these old 
long-focus cameras that were built in June 1916. 

It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of this improvement in 
our photography. The enemy’s batteries were at once laid bare. Details 
quite invisible to the observer’s eye were disclosed, and the value of the 
reconnaissance correspondingly increased. 

As already mentioned, one of the reasons for the location of the air force 
at Dunkirk was the destruction of the enemy’s Zeppelin sheds and Zep- 
pelins, the latter having become very active, with an increase in the number 
of attacks on England. Machines were sent up at night from Dunkirk 
with a view to intercepting any which might return by the coast route. 
None, however, were encountered until May 17th, when at 3.20 in the 
morning one was seen ten miles out to sea off La Panne, and nine machines 
were sent to attack it. Several of these managed to catch up with the Zep- 
pelin, which was estimated to be travelling at forty miles an hour and able 
to rise much faster than the planes. Flight-Commander Bigsworth, in an 

1 Of course, the Admiralty eventually paid up. 


278 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Avro, was the only pilot able to get above her. He dropped four 20-pound 
bombs in a line along her back while she was over Ostend, and soon 
afterwards observed heavy black smoke coming out at a point about 100 
feet from her tail. Very heavy anti-aircraft fire was encountered, despite 
his close proximity to the airship; so, after releasing the bombs, he pro- 
ceeded out to sea. Flight Sub-Lieutenant Warneford also reached the 
Zeppelin, but was about 1000 feet below it. His observer, A. M. Meddis, 
fired five shots from a -45 rifle, hitting her between the gondolas but 
without effect. Squadron-Commander Spenser-Grey got abreast of the 
airship at 9800 feet, but could not climb above her, so he attacked the rear 
gondola with his Lewis gun. Four machine-guns in the gondalas returned 
his fire. When last seen the airship was cruising at about 12,000 feet in 
the region of Ghent, with her tail well down. A report came in later that 
she failed to get home but landed in a damaged condition between Brussels 
and Ghent. 

An attack was made on the Gontrode Zeppelin sheds at 1 o’clock on the 
morning of May 26th by Flight Sub-Lieutenant Warneford. Six bombs 
were dropped from a height of 3500 feet. The corner of the shed was hit 
but no fire resulted. Exceptionally good work was carried out on the 
morning of June 7th when Flight-Lieutenants Wilson and Mills attacked 
the Zeppelin shed at Evere, north of Brussels. Bombs were dropped 
right into the shed, which immediately burst into flames. It is not 
known whether a Zeppelin was inside, but the flames reached a great 
height. 

About the same time Flight Sub-Lieutenant Warneford encountered a 
Zeppelin between Ghent and Brussels at a height of 6000 feet. He 
dropped six bombs on the airship, which exploded and fell to the ground in 
flames. The force of the explosion turned Sub-Lieutenant Warneford’s 
machine (a Morane monoplane) upside down and put it out of control 
for a time; the pilot had to make a forced landing in enemy territory. 
He succeeded, however, in restarting the engine and returned safely to 
his aerodrome at St. Pol. This officer was awarded a V.C. for his exploit, 
but he was unfortunately killed ten days later while flying a Henri Farman 
machine at Buch, near Paris. 

Again, later in the same year, 1915, on the night August gth, scout 
machines were sent up from Dunkirk at 3.45 a.m. to search for airships 
returning from a raid on England. ‘There was a thick mist along the coast, 
and a considerable quantity of cloud, with the result that nothing was seen, 
but at 8.15 next morning a signal was received that a damaged Zeppelin 
was in tow going towards Ostend. Flight-Commander Smyth-Pigott in a 
B.C.2C proceeded towards Ostend to search and discovered the airship 
about three miles off Ostend, being towed towards the harbour with an 
escort of four destroyers. He dropped two 20-pound bombs on her and 
observed that the rear compartment but one was damaged. He circled and 
approached her again and dropped six grenades without result, but 
observed that the Zeppelin’s back appeared to be broken. He was 
subjected to very severe anti-aircraft from the shore batteries and 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL 279 


machine-gun fire from the escorting destroyers, his machine being hit in 
two places. 

Immediately upon his return Flight-Lieutenant Keith Johnstone 
proceeded to Ostend on a Henri Farman to continue the attack, and he 
unhappily failed to return. Several machines left at intervals during the 
day to continue the bombardment, and in the evening the rear half of the 
airship was seen to be in the water, and the fore end on the quay ; a heavy 
smoke screen was put up by the enemy to prevent observation and attack. 
All our machines were subjected to very heavy anti-aircraft fire and 
several were hit. 

On August sth, 1915, Commander C. L. Lambe, R.N. (now Air Vice- 
Marshal Sir Charles Lambe), was appointed to take command of the air 
force at Dover and Dunkirk. Throughout the remainder of the War the 
Dover and Dunkirk air forces owed their efficiency largely to the foresight 
and sound sense of this able officer. I cannot express too strongly my 
appreciation of the work done by him. The reorganisation of the aerial 
squadrons was at once put in hand. 

The shortage in the supply of machines was a very serious handicap 
in those days. British aviation was still in its infancy, and engine failures 
were common occurrences, both on our side of the lines and over enemy 
territory, the latter meaning of course the loss of both aviators and 
machines. Neither of which we could spare. 

In November 1915, during a submarine patrol, Flight Sub-Lieutenant 
Ferrand, with A. M. Oldfield in a F.B.A., sighted a hostile destroyer 
escorted by four seaplanes. On the approach of the F.B.A. machine 
three of the German seaplanes made off towards Ostend while the fourth 
came forward to attack. A. M. Oldfield fired a number of rounds with his 
machine-guns at a range of about one hundred yards, hitting the German 
machine, an Albatross seaplane, which nose-dived into the water, leaving 
only her tail visible. ‘This was one of the first hostile aircraft to be 
destroyed by our patrol in this area, for the enemy always displayed a 
great aversion to conflict. Except for an occasional bomb raid, it was 
quite rare for a hostile machine to come more than a few miles over the 
lines into our territory, and, when attacked, it invariably turned back and 
dived, seeking the protection of the anti-aircraft defences and machine-guns. 

Owing to the storiny weather a British merchant vessel was stranded 
on the sand bank near the Whistle buoy on December 12th, 1915. At 
IO a.m. a report was received that two German Aviatiks were attacking her 
with bombs. Machines were sent out, and from 10.30 a.m. onwards a 
continuous patrol was maintained, all hostile machines being driven off 
and kept off until such time as the height of water enabled her to be salved. 
At 3.15 p.m. on the 14th Flight Sub-Lieutenant B. Graham, with Sub- 
Lieutenant Ince as observer in a Nieuport Scout, sighted a German 
seaplane resembling a Short, but much larger. The Nieuport Scout, 
which was much faster, gave chase and got within a hundred yards’ 
range, the position being then practically over the steamer. Flight Sub- 
Lieutenant Graham dived, and manceuvred his machine 80 as to enable his 


280 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


passenger to train his gun upwards under the enemy’s tail at fifty yards’ 
range. This mancuvre was repeated altogether three times, a number of 
rounds being fired into the enemy on each occasion. Upon the third 
occasion, after five rounds had been fired, the hostile machine suddenly 
turned sharply down, nose-dived vertically into the water, and was 
observed to be a flaming wreck. The pilot then volplaned down to 
investigate more closely, his engine failed to pick up, and he was forced 
to descend into the sea close to the paddle mine-sweeper Balmoral. The 
Nieuport turned over on striking the water and Lieutenant Graham had 
great difficulty in releasing his belt while under the water and extricating 
himself. Eventually both he and his observer got clear, and within a few 
minutes the Balmoral had lowered a boat and with great promptitude 
rescued the two officers. 

The enemy had many times dropped a considerable number of heavy 
bombs on to the depot aerodrome at Dunkirk with varying success, but 
very little serious damage was occasioned until the end of September 
1917, when a determined and almost successful effort was made to 
demolish the establishment. The attacks commenced on the night of 
September 25th and continued on the 27th and 2gth and the rst, 2nd, 
and 3rd of October. Over six hundred bombs were dropped, nearly all 
of very heavy calibre. The engine shops and carpenter shops were com- 
pletely burnt out, together with many of the smaller workshops and sheds. 
The explosion of one of the bomb dumps which was hit added to the extent 
of the disaster. A new base ina less exposed position was at once equipped. 

A special anti-Zeppelin patrol, to intercept Zeppelins returning from 
England, was carried out early on the morning of February 1st, 1916, 
and the Wing-Commander’s report is worth quoting as an example of 
the changes and chances of dawn patrols : 


“Ten machines, all Nieuports, left at three minutes’ intervals one and 
a half hours before sunrise to take up positions at about ten thousand feet, 
and were lying between Nieuport and Zeebrugge at about 5 a.m. out to 
sea with a view to intercepting any Zeppelins which attempted to pass 
that part of the coast at dawn. 

“* All machines were in position half an hour before dawn. 

“ The visibility high up was very good, and a Zeppelin could have been 
seen a long distance against the dawn. 

‘* Machines patrolled from ten miles seaward to about five miles inland, 
and were apparently not observed from the ground. ‘This was doubtless 
due to the thick mist which came up from the east just before sunrise, 
rising to a height of about three thousand feet, drifting rapidly down the 
coast and hiding the land and sea from the pilots. The machines carried 
only about two and a half hours’ petrol, and were therefore obliged to 
leave the patrol about 7.15 ; and 7.45 a.m. they completely lost themselves 
on coming down to a low altitude but all managed to strike the coast at 
various points between Gravelines and Cape Gris-Nez, with the exception 
of Flight Sub-Lieutenant Clayton, who missed Cape Gris-Nez, ran out 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL 281 


of petrol, and was finally picked up in the water about twenty miles NW. 
of Dieppe. 

“Two pilots, Flight-Lieutenants Mulock and Petre, were able to 
identify their positions on striking the coast and found their way back 
to the aerodrome. 

“Flight Sub-Lieutenant Penley ran out of petrol and came down on 
the water. He fortunately sighted the high-water mark on the way 
down and was just able to reach the sand. 

‘“‘ During the forenoon Flight-Lieutenant Mulock went out in a two- 
seater machine with mechanic, tools, etc., and found five machines and 
pilots who were down on the sands, gave them the necessary directions, 
and started them home. In three cases small repairs were carried out.” 


On July 8th from 2 p.m. to 9 p.m. a hundred fighter patrols were carried 
out in conjunction with the one English 12-inch and two French 9g-2-inch 
guns firing on the Tirpitz battery. These patrols prevented hostile 
machines from attacking the French and English aeroplanes and the kite 
balloon which were spotting for the guns, and from coming over the lines 
to note the position of our guns. Seven engagements with hostile machines 
occurred, one of which ended decisively in our favour. One of our 
patrols fell into the sea, but both the pilot and observer were picked up. 
Four British machines successfully carried out spotting for the operations, 
taking reliefs from 2 p.m. until 8 p.m. 

A continuation of the bombardment of the Tirpitz battery was made 
whenever weather conditions were favourable, but before long the enemy 
started putting up such an effective smoke-screen that spotting observa- 
tions were difficult. For some weeks this smoke-screen was always 
started directly any of our machines appeared in the vicinity of the battery. 
We, of course, took advantage of this in order to worry them and waste 
their material. Between 1.30 p.m. on the 8th and dusk on July gth no 
less than four hundred and forty-two hours’ flying was carried out by the 
three wings in this command. 

On receiving warning that hostile aircraft were over Dunkirk the 
advanced squadron at Furnes always sent several machines in chase. On 
one occasion a pilot in a Sopwith triplane sighted a hostile aeroplane making 
towards Nieuport. Diving from fourteen thousand to ten thousand feet, 
and manceuvring behind the enemy, he fired twenty rounds at close 
range. Unfortunately while this attack was being carried out the machine 
experienced a strong concussion and went out of control, diving steeply 
for some three thousand feet. The pilot managed, with the greatest diffi- 
culty, to get his machine again under control and made a safe landing with- 
out further damage. The machine was found to have the whole surface 
of the upper left-hand plane, and two-thirds of the upper right-hand plane, 
stripped of the fabric. It was a remarkable performance to have landed 
the machine safely under such circumstances. 

The airship station at Capel, near Dover, was included in the R.N.A.S. 
command. The work consisted chiefly of patrols in search of submarines 


282 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


and mines round the English coast, and the escort of troopships across to 
France. It seemed to me that one of the airships might be useful at Dun- 
kirk to work on the patrol line off the Belgian coast in conjunction with the 
monitors. A shed was erected on the farther side of the aircraft depot 
aerodrome, and in September the small airship S.S. Zero arrived. Pre- 
liminary towing trials were carried out with the monitor Sir Fohn Moore 
on September 28th. It was found, however, that the variable weather 
conditions, and the slow speed of the airship when released from the monitor 
in close proximity to the enemy’s coast, precluded the safe use of the vessel 
in this locality. 

On Sunday, August 13th, His Majesty the King and the Prince of Wales 
paid a visit to the 12-inch Naval gun, known as the Dominion Battery. 
Twelve of the pilots who were operating in this vicinity were presented to 
His Majesty, who afterwards inspected the gun. Shortly afterwards the 
Royal party drove to the aircraft depot and No. 1 Wing, where they were 
joined by the King and Queen of the Belgians and their children. A tour 
was made through all the workshops and hangars, and Their Majesties, 
who showed great interest in all that was being done, asked many questions 
about the work, displaying a very intimate knowledge of aerial affairs. 
Subsequently the whole party honoured the Lord Clive with a visit. 

Dominion battery, where the first 12-inch Mark X had been installed, 
and whose particular work was the destruction of the hostile Tirpitz 
battery, was before long located by the enemy and fired on. As that battery 
dropped his large shells very close indeed to the gun-house, it became 
necessary for us to use a smoke-screen whenever the gun was firing. 
Directly our smoke-screen was started, the enemy started his screen also 
over the Tirpitz battery. When our kite balloon ascended at Coxyde to 
spot for us, the hostile kite balloon at Wilskerke was immediately moved to 
a position just behind the enemy battery in readiness to spot for him. The 
Fleet, whilst carrying out the daylight barrage patrol, also reported that 
it was frequently fired on by the enemy’s shore batteries with great accuracy 
and at extreme range, and that spotting was probably being carried out by 
this kite balloon, which was moored in the vicinity of Ostend. For these 
reasons it was decided to attack it, and Flight Sub-Lieutenant R. Mackenzie 
volunteered to carry out the task. At this period there was no suitable 
bullet which would set fire to a kite balloon, so it was decided to employ 
Le Prieur rockets, a French invention which had been successfully used 
by the R.F.C. The rockets were attached to the interplane struts—four 
on each side—and fired electrically by the pilot. The method of attack 
was to approach from a height until nearly over the balloon, then to dive 
at full speed, and fire the rockets at such a distance that they would only 
have to travel three hundred or four hundred feet. If fired at a greater 
range, the curved trajectory of the rocket made it extremely improbable 
that a hit would be obtained, even on so large a target as a kite balloon. 

The difficulties associated with this operation were enhanced by the fact 
that, at this date, the German anti-aircraft batteries were extremely 
numerous and their fire very accurate; moreover, whenever the Fleet 


= = 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL 283 


was in sight, every enemy gun was kept manned. Flight Sub-Lieutenant 
Mackenzie selected an 80 Le Rhone Nieuport Baby, an extremely strong 
machine, which could be dived at a speed of 200 miles an hour. He 
thought out all the details of attack, and practised assiduously at a ground 
target ; a most trying operation for the nerves. 

The practice consisted in diving from a great height nearly vertically— 
in reality 70 degrees—towards the earth at an enormous speed until a 
mark on the ground grew in size as it was approached, and exactly filled 
a circle marked on the wind-screen of the machine. The elevators 
were then worked, and the machine brought parallel to the ground. A 
speed of 200 miles an hour is the equivalent of nearly 300-feet travel 
each second. An error of two seconds would infallibly mean a crash. 
Moreover, the stress on the planes in straightening up and thereby checking 
the vertical velocity of the machine by the air pressure under them, was 
very great. Just fancy the nerve required to see the earth rushing upwards 
towards the machine and yet holding on till the exact tenth part of a second ! 
In the actual attempt there were always present the dangers of colliding 
with the burning balloon, or of hitting the wire connecting it to the ground ; 
or, again, at so low an altitude, of being brought down by machine-gun fire. 

In a short time, having satisfied himself that he was ready for the 
attempt, permission was given to carry it out. One beautifully clear and 
cloudless day he left the aerodrome. 

He flew over at about a height of six thousand feet and dived with his 
throttle fully opened out. For a second or two the machine was out of 
control, and, lurching forward, he accidentally pressed the switch and 
fired his rockets when some hundreds of feet too far from the balloon. 
Recovering rapidly he turned and came back to the aerodrome. There 
he altered the mechanism of the switch to ensure that such an accident 
could not happen a second time. He started off again, following the same 
tactics, and this time put the majority, if not all, of his rockets into the kite 
balloon at so close a range that he actually passed underneath the balloon, 
only just missing the cable, before he could flatten out. The Fleet and the 
advance squadron at Furnes had the satisfaction of seeing the balloon come 
down in flames. He returned zig-zagging at a few hundred feet altitude 
until over our lines. For this gallant act he was awarded the D.S.O. I 
much regret that he was reported missing soon afterwards during the battle 
of the Somme. It was a great grief to the whole squadron, and, in fact, 
to all who knew him. Mackenzie was one of the best of organisers, and 
was always cheerful and bright. He left a lasting monument behind him 
in the form of a short essay of advice to young pilots. 

This attack made the enemy very jumpy for some time, in fact, their 
crews quitted their balloons in parachutes, or the balloons were rapidly 
hauled down, whenever an aeroplane was sighted. 

After a suitable interval, however, on October 2oth the Ostend kite 
balloon was again brought down in flames by Flight Sub-Lieutenant 
E. W. Norton of the advance squadron at Furnes, in a similar manner 
and on the same type of machine. He was for this awarded the D.S.C. 


284. THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Apart from the vast amount of work the R.N.A.S. was called upon to do 
for the Fleet, the protection of England against raids, and for the armies 
who were holding twenty-five miles of the line in Flanders, requests for 
the loan of fighting machines and pilots were made from the R.F.C. 
operating further south. In August four Nieuports were lent to assist in 
the Somme operations, and on October 26th a complete squadron of 
Sopwith “ Pup” fighters, under Squadron Commander G. R. Bromet, was 
lent, with the Admiralty approval, for work with the Army, in response to 
an urgent request from the military authorities. This squadron proceeded 
to Vert Galant Aerodrome, between Amiens and Doulens, and was the 
forerunner of four such squadrons which were formed at Dunkirk, and 
which proceeded at intervals to assist the R.F.C. 

As this volume deals primarily with the operations of the Dover Patrol 
no detailed account of the work with the Army can be attempted ; but it 
is well to state that the naval squadrons lent to the R.F.C. earned very 
high praise for their work right up to the signing of the armistice, and 
fully maintained the old traditions of the good service our naval forces 
have been able to extend to our Army on shore. 

The following is an extract from a letter from the Field-Marshal 
Commanding in Chief to the War Office : 


“‘'The five naval squadrons that have been lent to me for use on the 
Western Front have been of the greatest value. The pilots have shown 
energy, gallantry, and initiative, and have proved themselves capable of 
standing hard work and hard fighting. Further, the machines with which 
they are provided have undoubtedly helped largely towards the success 
of the aerial fighting which has taken place this spring on the front of the 
British Army in France. 

“TI should be glad if this expression of my views could be conveyed 
to the Admiralty.” 


In December 1916 I had a request from Sir Douglas Haig to supply 
as much assistance as possible to the R.A.F. operating farther south. 
Of course every endeavour was made to co-operate, and I instructed 
Captain Lambe to discuss the technical requirements with General 
Trenchard,! the representative of General Headquarters in France, and 
to forward proposals which would comply as fully as possible with the 
Army requirements. General Trenchard pointed out that it was of the 
greatest importance that as many squadrons as possible should be available 
in the spring, one squadron in the opening days being equal to two or 
more later on. The squadron which was at present operating with the 
R.F.C, was doing excellent work, already being credited with sixteen or 
seventeen German machines destroyed and some twenty-eight driven 
down damaged for the loss only of three pilots killed or missing and one 
temporarily invalided. This had been achieved during two months of 
the winter, when very little flying was possible. General Trenchard 
wished to retain this squadron, and asked for another to be sent early in 


2 Now Marshal of the Royal Air Force Lord Trenchard, G.C.B. 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL — 285 


February with an addition of one per month up to a total of five squadrons. 
In order to meet this suggestion Captain Lambe requested a still larger 
supply of naval pilots and fighting machines, and the Admiralty promised 
to make all possible endeavours to meet our wants. This arrangement was 
duly carried out, and the following list shows the amount of help that was 
given by the R.N.A.S. in the Dover command to the Army authorities 
during 1917 : 

R.N.AS. Moots 


Squadron. Date of Departure. Date of Return. sory as 
I February 2nd, 1917. November 1st, 1917. 84 
3 February rst, 1917. June 15th, 1917. 44 
6 March 2oth, 1917. August 28th, 1917. 5 
8 October 26th, 1916. February 3rd, 1917. 3 
g June 15th, 1917. September 2gth, 1917. 34 
10 May 14th, 1917. November 2oth, 1917. 6 
A November 18th, 1917. — 


Owing, no doubt, to the fact that the demand for seaplanes was 
naturally much smaller than for land machines for war operations, the 
development of this particular kind of aircraft fell somewhat behind. 
Moreover, as the reliability of the aeroplane’s engines increased these 
aircraft flew as well over the water as over the land. The ratson d’étre of 
the seaplane was therefore fast disappearing, and owing to its slow speed 
it was becoming hopelessly handicapped for fighting a duel with the 
newer types of German aeroplanes, It was evident that unless something 
was done to alter this state of affairs we should be losing them in consider- 
able numbers. When first introduced, the Sopwith Schneider Cup sea- 
plane was a very good machine both for speed and performance and 
compared favourably with any of the hostile machines with which it 
came into contact. The enemy, however, was improving his aeroplanes 
as fast as we were, and by the time the Sopwith triplane arrived he 
possessed several aeroplanes which while being, generally speaking, 
inferior in many ways to the majority of our land machines, certainly 
had a better performance than our fighter seaplanes. Thus towards the 
end of 1916 the report: ‘“‘ Seaplane failed to return” began to get too 
frequent, and we naturally commenced to use land machine-fighters for 
sea flying in preference to seaplanes. 

Later on I wrote a memorandum which explained the relative advan- 
tages and disadvantages of the seaplane and aeroplane when used on the 
enemy’s coast. The object of this was to persuade the Admiralty Air 
Department that what applied to the Devonshire coast, with no enemy 
within possible striking distance, was inapplicable to the Belgian coast, 
where the slow seaplane had to fight a duel with a fast quick-climbing 
aeroplane. I wrote: 


“The seaplane at present is an inferior aeroplane, considerable advan- 
tages being sacrificed by providing it with the power of floating on the 


286 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


water. This floatation is entirely unnecessary, provided the engines are 
reliable. The engines of aeroplanes, I consider, are sufficiently reliable 
to make the addition of floats unnece 

“Take first into account the inferior reliability of the seaplane over 
the aeroplane, and therefore the greater chance of failure over water ; then 
consider the number of seaplane crews lost or interned (although their 
craft were fitted with floats) as well as those lost through their inferior 
speed and poor fighting capabilities ; against these losses balance the few 
lives that have been saved by seaplanes landing and floating on the open 
sea, and I am convinced that the balance of advantage in safety lies with 
the aeroplane and not the seaplane when the two are used over water. 

‘‘ The duties of the seaplane are : 


“‘ (a) Reconnaissance. 
** (6) Spotting for ships firing. 
‘‘(c) Submarine patrol. 

** Taking these seriatim : 

‘** Reconnaissances of two kinds : 
““(i) Coastal. 


** (ii) Over the North Sea in an area roughly comprised by a line 
joining the North Foreland with the Scheldt. 


** As regards (i) it is not safe to send seaplanes on a coastal reconnaissance 
without a fighting escort of aeroplanes as our seaplanes are powerless 
against German aeroplanes; the latter merely eat them up in a duel. 
If aeroplanes can escort they can carry out the reconnaissance. Why handi- 
cap them by sending a slow seaplane to reduce their speed ? 

“* As regards (ii), if the aeroplanes can, as they frequently do, in fact 
do almost daily, fly over our patrol line for a distance of forty miles from 
Dunkirk to Zeebrugge and remain flying over this area for an hour, 
surely they can do the same in any direction of the compass. As recon- 
naissance over this patrol in the North Sea involves no more flying over 
the sea than is daily done by aeroplanes, and can be completed at greater 
speed with an aeroplane than a seaplane, why not use the faster and more 
reliable article ? The Germans raid England and fly the whole width of 
the North Sea with aeroplanes ; they never use seaplanes, why do we use 
the cumbrous seaplane to fly half-way over the North Sea ? 

‘“‘ Spotting. The same remarks apply. If fighting aeroplanes have to 
be supplied to protect the seaplane, why not use aeroplane spotters ? 

“‘ Submarine patrol. The remarks as to reconnaissance apply, but in 
addition high speed is of the greatest moment. A submarine is, in my 
opinion, guilty of the greatest negligence if she is bombed by a seaplane 
in these waters. The depth of water is ideal to lie on the bottom. The 
waters are muddy and opaque. A seaplane should be observed in ample 
time for a submarine to submerge and move away sufficiently under water 
to be absolutely immune from bomb attack. The only chance of aircraft 
success is to have a very fast machine that can spring like a terrier on a 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL — 287 


rat from a great height, or come quickly out of the sun in the morning 
or evening. Obviously a fast machine has the greater chance of success. 

“I only speak of these waters and this Patrol. I know nothing of the 
conditions governing other patrols where seaplanes may be of special 
value—of these I am entirely ignorant. The views I have expressed 


merely refer to the waters in my area, but these views I hold to be 
incontrovertible.” 


These remarks were at that time looked on as rank heresy and with many 
with great disfavour. 

In the autumn of 1917 the Flanders command of the R.N.A.S. reached 
the culminating point of its bombing power, of which full advantage was 
taken. There were two. complete squadrons of Handley Page machines 
at Coudekerque and one squadron of D.H. 4 machines at Petite Snythe, 
which had replaced the Sopwith bombers in July. The Handley Pages 
were used every night when bombing operations were possible, and the 
weight of bombs dropped on single occasions sometimes exceeded eight 
tons. The total weight released upon the enemy since the formation of 
number seven A Squadron was watched with great interest as it climbed 
up to the 100-ton mark. This event occurred in August and was duly 
celebrated, and when the figure rose in October to 200 tons it became the 
occasion for a great dinner in the Coudekerque mess, to which all the 
officers in the command who could possibly be spared and accommodated 
were invited. 

Advantage was taken of the winter months to give as much rest as pos- 
sible to the pilots who had been through such a strenuous time during 
the summer. Arrangements were made for one squadron to rest at 
Walmer and another at Dover, and as much leave as possible was given 
to those who were forced to remain on active service. 

The lighter-than-air section of the Dover Air Force was stationed at 
Capel between Dover and Folkestone, and at Polegate, near Beachy Head. 
The duties of these airships, as previously mentioned, were to patrol the 
waters and keep submarines from resting on the surface. Long and 
arduous patrols were carried out whenever the weather permitted ; but 
this form of aircraft was far more often forced to remain idle through 
adverse weather than the other branch of the Air Service. 

Several improvements in small airships, or ‘‘ Blimps”’ as they were 
called, were introduced under Lieutenant-Commander Cunningham; a 
new chassis was designed and built, which reflected great credit on the 
designers. It is extraordinary to relate that when the results of the first 
trials of this chassis were forwarded to the Admiralty Air Department a 
reply was received saying that they strongly objected to officers trying to 
effect improvements in matériel, and asking by whose authority this 
particular design had been tried. Fortunately I had taken a great interest 
in the labours and zeal of these young airmen, and had watched the 
progress of construction of the chassis, and I was able to say that I had 
given approval, and the opportunity was afforded me of pointing out the 


288 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


inadvisability of trying to check initiative among young officers, especially 
in war time. The result was amusing, since the design that had been the 
cause of this bureaucratic outburst was adopted shortly afterwards for 
all the small airships which were subsequently built. 

Experience of aircraft on the Belgian coast during the War leads me 
to emphasise two points which deserve the attention of those in authority. 

First, although the pilot of the single-seater fighter 1s, par excellence, 
the cavalryman of the air, the dashing, quick-moving fighter whose brain 
has to respond with a speed enhanced by the rate at which he is travelling, 
and the rapid tactics of his opponent, he is not the only man of value to 
the Admiral. He and his confréres are the backbone of the fighting force 
to gain supremacy in the air and are the pick of the pilots. But—and a 
very big but—we must not forget that the observer is a close second to 
the dashing pilot. A good observer is worth his weight in gold to the 
Admiral in the absence of photographic reconnaissance. His qualifica- 
tions for coast work are most varied. He should be able to distinguish 
between classes of vessels. Frequently I have had destroyers reported 
as battleships, nor is the mistake one easy to avoid without concentrated 
attention to comparative detail. He should be able to judge of movements 
of troops, to spot, to pick up detail, and should possess many other 
virtues. There are a hundred first-class pilots for each really first-class 
observer. It is my matured conviction that no post should rank higher 
nor attain more recognition than that of skilled observer. 

The other point is that every sacrifice should be made to give squadrons 
periodic rest in war, and individual youngsters on joining up should be 
given a graduated training in fighting. I know it is difficult. I am familiar 
with the usual arguments: ‘‘ We must use them at once ; we’re so short, 
we may lose command of the air; we have not sufficient squadrons to 
allow for rest.’” I know all these arguments; but an immature pilot, 
pitted against one inured to air combat, is generally shot down like a young 
rook. It would have paid to have given him graduated schooling, even if 
it had delayed his being fully fledged for a month or six weeks. 

Again, a tired, worn pilot is not worth half a fresh one. To see, one by 
one, the men of a squadron fall out ‘‘ missing and not returned ” with 
nothing for the remnant to look forward to but the same old daily work 
and hard fight, cannot but react on the brain power of the individual. 
It is essential to give men rest. Rest does two things: it recuperates 
their nervous system and it gives them something to which to look forward. 
The man who works a machine to destruction through want of overhaul 
is not a good works manager ; he will not increase his output of work by 
such methods. The man in command who works his airmen till they 
melt away through impaired fighting efficiency for want of rest is no 
leader ; he will not get the best out of his Air Force. The principle of 
rest following work should be recognised, allowed for in allocating 
numbers, and adhered to in spite of seductive reasoning. Men are merely 
human, even if airmen are heroes. 

I cannot end this chapter without expressing admiration of the work 


THE AIR SERVICES OF THE DOVER PATROL ~ 289 


of the Admiralty Air Department under the guidance, in turn, of three 
distinguished officers, Commodore Murry Sueter, Rear-Admiral C. L. 
Vaughan-Lee, and finally Rear-Admiral Godfrey Paine, who grappled so 
well with the difficulties of supply of both personnel and machines. The 
advance between 1915 and 1917, both in types of machines and in rapidity 
of supply, was phenomenal. Acquainted as I am from experience of the 
immense difficulty of supply when types are undergoing constant change, 
I look on the results obtained by the Air Department as truly marvellous. 

Undoubtedly, now that we are at peace, with the anxiety of war only 
a dim memory, evidence of extravagance and waste of money will shock 
many who know nothing of the difficulties and have forgotten the urgency 
of supply. Let us be broad-minded and fair, and remember when we listen 
to criticism of how expenditure might have been saved, that in all proba- 
bility it would have been at the expense of rapidity of production of those 
weapons on which the success of our arms largely depended. 

I feel that what I have written contains barely an outline of the activities 
of the R.N.A.S. attached to the Dover Patrol. The services of these 
aviators were invaluable. To have included accounts of all the incidents 
of bombing or fighting in the air would, owing to the similarity of detail, 
have been wearisome to the reader. ‘These airmen of the Dover Patrol 
not only did our work by sea and land, but held out a strong helping hand 
to the Army, both by taking over a considerable sector in the north and by 
lending assistance to the troops on the Somme. Their gallantry was 
beyond all praise. Their morale and efficiency may be directly attributed 
to Captain Lambe and the squadron commanders who worked under him. 


THE STRAFE OF THE KITE BALLOON 


Do you mind you, brave Mackenzie, when I stood by your machine 
At Petite Snythe, three years or 80 ago, 

When you told me of your exploit full of life, and Oh ! 80 keen, 
With a modesty that made your action glow ? 


How you planned and how you practised every detail of attack, 

In your scheme to fire and burn that kite balloon ; 

When first you tried, misfortune came and forced you to turn back, 
But off you flew that very afternoon ? 


How you rose and circled widely till you gained twelve thousand feet, 
Then you turned and passed Braye Dune and Adenkerke ; 

How you always kept on rising high in order to defeat 

The anti-aircraft guns that were at work ? 


How you sped wide of your quarry, then, in order to deceive 
And lull suspicions of your real intent, 

To foster false security and make the Hun believe 

You were scouting—so you put him off the scent ? 


When the Ostend locks were traversed, you swung sharply t’wards the sea 
And saw your prey distinctly far below. 

And I saw your eyes were sparkling and reflecting the past glee 

With which you dashed to meet your long-sought foe. 


How you steered until that silver streak lay shining underneath, 
You dived and dropped at almost lightning speed 

With your eyes intently focussed and your jaws with fast-set teeth ; 
You proved your warrior ancestry of breed. 


How the silver streak grew larger, slowly first, then swelled apace, 
It grew and filled the gauge at bursting rate. 

How you fired the rockets truly with the back-fire in your face, 
Then waited calmly for an unknown fate. 


While you counted five, quite slowly, for the rockets to get clear, 
Still diving at two hundred miles an hour, 

You kept rushing ever downwards in your gallant mad career, 
Gaining speed as if propelled by magic power. 


Then at last that five was counted and you straightened from the dive, 
The strain to check the fall, near broke the plane ; 

But the wood and wire and fabric just managed to survive ; 
Unharmed you gained your normal course again. 


290 


THE STRAFE OF THE KITE BALLOON 291 


But the wait of those five seconds took you tearing just below 

The flaming mass that roared above your head. 

While your wing-tip missed the mooring-rope by just an inch or so, 
And, somewhat scorched, you turned for home and fled. 


Flying low down to the sand-dunes, you had had no time to rise, 
As gun and rifle crashed in angry din, 

Just to zig-zag was the only thing your brain could then devise, 
But it served to bring you through and let you win. 


Oh ! the glory of that fly back with each nerve vibrating still. 
The triumph of the fighter who has won ! 

With each memory evoking an exhilarating thrill 

And the knowledge of a proud deed nobly done. 


I remember as I listened, that I stroked your mascot’s head— 
A little teddy bear securely tied. 

And I asked if he was with you, and how laughingly you said, 
That in all your stunts he sat close by your side. 


Did he play you false that mascot, that small black and yellow sprite ? 
Or was he lost, or took the bullet, too ? 

That he did not save his master in his last misfortuned fight 

When there died as brave a man as ever flew. 


Tell me, where are you now resting ? And your ashes, where are they ? 
The Somme’s grim battlefield alone can tell. 

Only “‘ missing ”—that one word was all we heard of that last fray, 
And all we know of how your end befel. 


Though you left us nought of ashes to be reverenced below 
Your memory we'll honour to the grave. 

Your example nobly shines among those memories that go 
To inspire men to be gallant and be brave. 


RECAPITULATION 


have been described, however inadequately, let me in con- 
clusion briefly survey the functions of the Dover Force, how they 
originated and how they grew. 

At the outbreak of the War the main use of the Patrol in the Straits of 
Dover, acting under the orders of an officer with his headquarters at 
Harwich, was to enforce the examination of merchant vessels for the 
discovery of contraband or enemy subjects trying to creep into Germany. 
Before the opening of hostilities plans had been prepared for a limited 
number of destroyers to carry out the examination service by boarding 
vessels at sea; it was intended that only those vessels were to be sent to 
the Downs who objected to search, or were regarded as suspicious. Of 
course such examination in the fairway of traffic was found to be impos- 
sible, owing to sea conditions and the number of merchantmen involved. 
The Downs Boarding Flotilla grew therefore in size, and the Downs 
developed into a great anchorage for merchant ships. 

This assembly of vessels in an unprotected anchorage, representing 
in hulls and cargoes an immense aggregation of wealth, was regarded at 
the commencement of the War without anxiety, since the Downs was 
fairly secure against submarines; it was attack by such craft which 
obsessed most minds and obscured clear vision of the varied possibilities 
of war at sea. Attention being focussed on the submarine, the latent 
danger of the destroyer was not fully appreciated ; moreover was not the 
Elbe a long way off ? 

The German advance in Belgium at once emphasised the importance 
of the Dover Patrol. Gun-fire from long-range guns at sea, such as ships 
possessed and the Army did not possess, was demanded to assist in 
checking the onward wave, which threatened to outflank the Allied 
Army and to grasp the sovereignty of the Channel ports on the French 
coast. 

Some 6-inch monitors and an old battleship were added to the Dover 
Force at this crisis, and the waters of the Belgian coast became of equal 
importance to those of the Narrows ; they were, in short, converted into a 
frontier of the Allied Forces. The Belgian coast became a base of German 
sea power on the flank of the streams of our commerce, and of the sea 
communication with our Army. 

Still, there was thought to be no cause for much uneasiness, as it was 
confidently hoped that a spring offensive in 1915 would throw back the 
enemy, and free the coast, before full use could be made of its harbours. 


292 


N OW that the various units of the Dover Patrol and their work 


RECAPITULATION 293 


In the spring of 1915 questions of victory or defeat lay in the balance, 
though the nation realised little of the dire possibilities that faced us. I 
know nothing of the military exigencies that underlay the offensive of that 
spring. I only point out that the decision not to attack the enemy in 
Flanders, as Sir John French advocated, was a grave one. The reasons 
must have been weighty; indeed, leaving the enemy to fortify and 
entrench himself on the flank of the armies in France and on the trade 
route to London and the east coast was associated with grave risks. 

The main strategy of sea and land forces is inseparable. That of the 
Navy and Army should, of course, be co-ordinated in one comprehensive 
scheme, not two schemes ; but the execution of the broad outline should 
be left to the individual commanders. 

The occupation of the Belgian coast furnishes an excellent example 
of thistruth. I have no hesitation in describing the strategy which allowed 
the Germans to settle down on that coast, to fortify it and to develop its 
harbours, as a gamble with the fate of the British Empire. It may have 
been a necessary gamble, but gamble it was. We could not prevent the 
Germans from occupying Belgium ; our unpreparedness for a Continental 
war, of the magnitude of that in which we became involved, made that 
impossible. But immediately after the first battle of Ypres every endeavour 
should have been made to regain the coast. With that coast in the posses- 
sion of an active enemy with sea initiative and large resources—and at that 
period we had no reason not to credit the enemy with sea instincts—we 
should, in all probability, have lost the War. All the dangers arising from 
the thoroughly organised raids, which I have touched upon in foregoing 
chapters, pivoted on that twenty-five miles of coast-line. 

The one area sacred to an army in the field, so far as defence and protec- 
tion are concerned, is its line of communications. To allow an enemy’s 
military forces to settle down on the flank of the lines of communication 
of an army, would be looked on by all soldiers as madness; but that 1s 
what we permitted the enemy to accomplish, on a magnified scale at sea, 
by their occupation and retention of the Belgian coast. Not only did we 
allow the enemy to fortify bases on the flank of the essential sea communica- 
tions of the British Army, the Belgian Army, and the Northern French 
Army, but also on the lines of communication of the food supplies and 
main trade routes of a large portion of England. 

‘Oh, the Navy will look after the sea part,” said some. That was all 
very well; but those responsible for the offensive of the Allied Armies, 
by allowing the enemy to settle on and fortify the Belgian coast, created 
the possibility of the Admiralty being obliged to watch, passively, our sea 
commerce in the Channel being ruthlessly destroyed ; or, at last, being 
forced to commit national suicide by dividing the Grand Fleet between 
Scapa and Dover. That, broadly, is the peril which energetic action on 
the part of the Germans would have created. It was not one whit a less 
dangerous policy than if the Navy had allowed the enemy to occupy 
Dunkirk, flanking the line of communications of the British Army, saying : 
‘Oh, the Army can look after the land part of the War.” 


294 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


As a matter of fact, both Sir John French and Sir Douglas Haig were 
conscious of the dangers of the situation, and from 1914 to 1917 strove 
hard to get the necessary backing for a Flanders offensive. I hammered 
away also. But those responsible must either have found the Allies ob- 
durate, or have forgotten the old history of the Flanders coast, how, 
during past centuries, the nation had freely spent blood and money to keep 
our eastern shores free from menace by a power strong at sea, even when 
we had no army in France dependent on the freedom of the Channel. 
We, however, folded our hands and smiled complacently, while the enemy 
seized and fortified this position of advantage during a war which involved 
every British interest, not excluding the freedom of this country from 
invasion. 

In these favourable circumstances a far-seeing and sea-inspired German 
- Chief of Staff would have prepared his blow in every one of its thousand 
details, silently and relentlessly, during 1915 and delivered it with crushing 
and deadly effect in March 1916. Well, indeed, may we thank our fortun- 
ate star, that the enemy had not sufficient sea initiative to probe the strength 
of our offensive blockade of his coast, and fathom the weakness of the 
forces that lay behind to guard our vital interests in the Channel. 

As the Flanders spring offensive of 1915 was postponed, we at Dover 
had to do the best we could to mitigate the evils of the strategical position. 
Attacks on Zeebrugge locks and Ostend dockyard were carried out, as soon 
as the monitors with 12-inch guns joined the Patrol, in order to create a 
feeling of insecurity on the part of the enemy, and a doubt as to the value 
of these bases. Damage, but not vital damage, was done. A close attack 
on the locks at Zeebrugge was proposed and discussed ; but abandoned, 
since we had no means of producing a good smoke-screen at that time ; 
a smoke-screen was an absolute necessity. A plan for blocking Ostend was 
prepared, which, in turn, was given up in view of the utter uselessness of 
attempting to close that harbour to submarine and destroyer traffic 
by any form of blocking, and also because proposals were under discussion 
for landing troops in Ostend, either as part of an offensive on the coast, or as 
a corollary to an advance further inland ; for then the Army would have 
required to use this port. Reconnaissance revealed that Ostend was 
defended by a battery which had fifty per cent more range than our 12- 
inch monitors, and at Zeebrugge a battery was being installed in the sand- 
dunes with double range of any gun which was mounted in our vessels. 

In the beginning of 1916 a Flanders advance was again proposed. Ostend 
and Zeebrugge had, by that time, as I have remarked, been defended by 
batteries which made the 12-inch monitors useless, so a landing in Ostend 
behind the batteries came under detailed consideration, to be carried out 
in conjunction with the Army in Belgium and northern France. This, 
however, was considered to be impracticable. The enemy’s activity in 
mine-laying and with submarines in the Channel was increasing, and 
rendered our intervention all the more urgent. 

In order to counteract this latter evil, I laid the Belgian Coast Barrage 
and started the Coast Patrol. This patrol was intended to check the egress 


RECAPITULATION 295 


and ingress of enemy submarines and other vessels moving in and out of the 
ports on the Belgian coast ; to afford us facilities for observation of the 
coast and the waters between the Scheldt and the North Foreland, that is, 
those immediately flanking the Narrows of the Channel to the eastward, 
through which any offensive force must have passed to attack the Channel ; 
and lastly to disguise by pure bluff the weakness of our destroyer force, 
for it led the enemy to make an entirely false estimate of our strength in 
the Channel. The Germans were thus deterred from undertaking offen- 
sives on our shipping in the Downs which might have developed into 
unparalleled disasters. The Flanders advance in the meantime had been 
countermanded, and the most perilous time this country had ever experi- 
enced in its long history was entered upon. 

I describe this as the most perilous time since the question as to whether 
the Germans would risk a fleet action or not still lay in the balance. Even if 
the Germans avoided a fleet action, I regarded the threat of a fleet action inthe 
northern part of the North Sea as a possible manceuvre in order to cover a 
real offensive by the enemy in the Straits and on our commerce generally. 
A great game lay within the grasp of Germany owing to her possession of 
the alternative bases of the Belgian coast, which obviated the necessity 
of forcing the passage between Harwich and the Dutch coast before and 
after a raid; she thus had the choice of places of departure for her attack- 
ing vessels, and was able to force upon us the duty of patrolling a very 
great area of water with exiguous resources of ships and men. If to the 
serious losses we were sustaining by submarine warfare had been added 
those which might have occurred in raids on the Downs and the Channel, 
we would have been brought face to face with grave disaster. 

To describe this matter fully would involve too many technicalities ; 
but the battle of Jutland, without an accompanying raid by German light 
forces down south, marked the passing of a great danger period, so far as 
our shipping and the British lines of communications were concerned. 

My three predominating preoccupations in 1916, therefore, were : 
first, the protection of the shipping in the Downs, and the prevention of a 
disaster to the country of dimensions previously unheard of in our Naval 
history ; secondly, the preparation of plans for turning the enemy out of 
his Belgian bases ; and thirdly, the protection of the left flank of the Allied 
Armies against a landing in the rear. These were the essential respon- 
sibilities of the Patrol. Hunting submarines was an almost useless and 
helpless occupation with only the undeveloped listening appliances which 
were then available. For in our waters a submarine could dive on approach 
from the eastward, remain entirely submerged, and reappear well clear to 
the westward, or even sneak through on the surface at night. Barrages 
and mine-fields, and especially the latter, were the only means of dealing 
with the submarines. But the laying of mine-fields was delayed owing to 
inadequate supplies of mines. Turning the Germans out of the Belgian 
coast would have eased the submarine situation considerably ; but, of 
course, it would not have entirely removed this peril. The danger of 
serious destroyer raids would, however, have been considerably reduced. 


296 'THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


Minor operations to assist the Allied Armies, such as the attraction of 
enemy troops to the coast by the threat of invasion, were undertaken ; 
but the main work consisted in maintaining the Belgian Coast Patrol, and 
proving that, with adequate foresight, daring, and caution, a force could 
daily treat with contempt the enemy submarines and destroyers while 
patrolling within sight of Ostend and Zeebrugge. Moreover, the psycho- 
logical effect of this patrol on the German sea-mentality was invaluable. 

The year 1916 also saw our system of long-range firing nearly perfected. 
A method of night bombardment was evolved, and other ideas worked out 
and stored for future use. The smoke-screen became a practical weapon. 
By the end of the year the Belgian Coast Patrol had to be raised, owing 
to unfavourable weather conditions, for we had no ships suitable for such 
work in winter. The slow steaming 12-inch monitors could not safely face 
the combination of gales, tides, and shoals; conditions which they were 
never designed to combat. The barrage from the Goodwins to Dunkirk 
was also started, and proposals for the Great Landing which was in con- 
templation were put forward. ‘The new 15-inch monitors began to arrive, 
and every preparation was made for heavy bombardments the following 
year. As the winter progressed, mining again became active in the 
Channel, but the previous years’ practice in sweeping, and our accumu- 
lated experience in organising traffic, greatly reduced the danger of the 
mine-fields. 

In October of this year the first destroyer raid by the enemy in the 
Channel took place. Once again I was brought face to face with the pos- 
sibility that lay with the enemy of doing us grave injury. The time 
for action on the part of the Germans, however, was passing, if it had not 
passed ; the end of the period in which it was possible for them to injure 
our traffic vitally was certainly fast approaching. The time wasted by the 
enemy had worked in our favour. Destroyers had been pushed on in our 
building yards, and we had the prospect of receiving large additions to our 
numbers. Above all, the previous months of sea inactivity had bred dry 
rot in the German Navy. The raids they undertook were not serious 
attempts to sink, burn, and destroy, but were intended merely to supply 
sensational and heartening incidents which those, ignorant of sea affairs, 
in England as well as in Germany, welcomed with avidity. 

There are two causes of dry rot. One is due to the inactivity of the 
crews ; the other when naval commanders undertake useless operations 
in order to bring their names into prominence, or to enhance the prestige 
of a weak admiralty. These apparently were the underlying aims of the 
Channel raids. ‘The Germans had taught their officers to run—and they 
ran. The safe return of a German warship was regarded as of more 
importance than the sinking of an enemy vessel. Hence we suffered 
immunity from serious injury. The disintegration, morally and physically, 
of the German Navy will afford an object lesson for all times. 

The year 1917 saw the gradual culmination of our previous two years’ 
incessant work. The Great Landing and the advance on the Belgian Coast, 
it is true, never took place. Which was a bitter disappointment ; but, so 


RECAPITULATION 297 


far as the Navy was concerned, the organisation of the landing will not for 
years be forgotten. The re-instituted barrage and patrol on the Belgian 
coast made possible the bombardment of the enemy’s positions. The 
bombardment of the Zeebrugge locks showed the large wastage in 15-inch 
guns that would be required to destroy so small a target ; and, as guns to 
replace those mounted in the monitors were not available, the firings on 
the lock-gates had to be relinquished. Ostend was deserted as a naval 
base on account of several bombardments and Bruges became the only 
port on the coast useful to the Germans. The installation of 18-inch guns 
in our monitors which had hitherto had only 12-inch guns was therefore 
commenced to enable us to bombard this base. Heavy guns were landed 
and installed to assist the coast advance. The Goodwin—Dunkirk barrage 
was completed and proved moderately successful only, in spite of the 
herculean labour of the drifter crews, who laid and repaired it, under 
adverse conditions. It was at all events an attempt to discourage the 
enemy until such time as mines were available. 

The Folkestone—-Gris-nez mine-barrage was planned in February 1917, 
and the mines being received in November was nearly completed by 
December 31st, when my command suddenly came to an end. The first 
submarine was blown up in the uncompleted minefield before I left 
Dover. This barrage definitely denied passage to the enemy’s submarines. 
Minefields near Dutch territorial waters were also laid for the embarass- 
ment of the enemy, and several of the enemy torpedo craft were destroyed 
off the Belgian coast. The attacks on Zeebrugge Mole and Canal, and 
on Ostend were planned for the last months of 1917, as a consolation 
enterprise in view of the disappointment caused by the abandonment of 
the Great Landing. All these irons were in the fire, all operations were 
in train when I was required to leave Dover. But I have this consolation : 
so complete was the programme on which our energies were concentrated 
when I gave up command that, during the spring and summer of 19,7 | % 
and until the armistice was signed, no new operation was planned or 
undertaken by the Dover Patrol that was not in progress in December 1917. 

For three years we had fought the enemy with our guns and with our 
brains. The situation had changed from one of great possibilities to the 
enemy and danger to this country, to one of comparative safety for our 
interests afloat. This change had been effected by relentless and unremit- 
ting exertions on the part of the Dover Patrol. We had maintained sea 
communications with the Armies in France without intermission, in spite 
of destroyers, submarines, mines, and aricraft, and our commerce had 
passed as freely and with almost equal security to and from the Thames 
as it did in peace time. We may well claim that the work of the Dover 
Patrol in 1915-16-17 drew the teeth of the enemy in occupation of the 
Belgian coast and cancelled the potential value to the Germans of these 
bases during the remainder of the War. 

Another great lesson, which is apt to be forgotten, deserves to be em- 
phasised. We had gauged the mentality of the enemy, and had proved that 
those who ruled his navy were deficient in those higher attributes which are 


298 THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


necessary elements of a master-mind that is capable of guiding successfully 
war at sea. What are these? In our sailors so subtle and interwoven are 
they that they almost frustrate individual detection. The generations of 
the last thousand years form the loom. Experience gained by daily fights 
with the sea in all weathers, the brushes with the enemy at sea, the chases, 
the disappointments, the successes, the great full-dress Fleet actions, the 
inspiration of example, all these constitute the threads from which 
heredity, the weaver, fashions a sea-going and sea-fighting race. L’audace 
toujours Vaudace ; the instinct of ‘‘ going for’’ an enemy whenever seen ; 
the resolve never to brook an insult at sea ; the conviction that a glorious 
example is worth the loss of a ship; that it is “‘ dogged that does it”’ ; 
that your countrymen have always been “ top dog ”’ at sea, and intend to 
remain so; that constant thought should be used to facilitate action, not 
to avoid it; that an enemy fought is an enemy crippled, though he may 
get the best of it ; and, above all, the instinct to attack on sight without an 
arriére-pensée, these are some of the guiding characteristics of a sea race. 

Cradock was right. He lost the Good Hope and the Monmouth, vessels 
of doubtful value, as well as their magnificent personnel, but he left behind 
an example. The blow to our sea supremacy which was inflicted at 
Coronel, Lord Fisher, with instinctive rapidity of decision and courage, 
promptly took steps to avenge by sending out Sir Doveton Sturdee and the 
12-inch battle cruisers. The battle of the Falkland Islands was the sequel. 

To have dodged Von Spee’s squadron would have left our commerce 
on the Pacific coast open to attack, with the probability of still greater 
damage being done in other seas; but the challenge and the loss of our 
ships brought that speedy retribution which perhaps otherwise might 
never have overtaken those units of the enemy. 

Let us never forget the part heredity plays in creating sea-instinct. 
Look at the way our fisher-folk crowded to our fleets to do the hard sea 
work to which their lives at sea had inured them, and for which our Navy 
had neither the vessels nor the men. As the crews of the old Cinque Port 
vessels and the volunteer fleet crowded to the flag when invasion by 
Frenchman or Spaniard was threatened ; so our fisher-folk and officers 
and men of the Merchant Navy, Royal Naval Reserve, and Royal Naval 
Volunteer Reserve rallied, unarmed, to do our auxiliary work in the Great 
War. Nothing but heredity could have inspired the men of the Merchant 
Navy to sail, continuously and calmly, when at any moment an unseen mine 
or torpedo might have sealed their fate in an open sea, where all possible 
succour was rendered practically impossible. ‘The studied frightfulness 
of the enemy was deliberately planned to make our seamen cowards and 
cause them to forget their calling. 

In the wars of the Napoleonic era we won at sea, and won easily, largely 
because the disastrous political regime of the French had dismissed prac- 
tically the whole of the naval officers, who were Royalists and sailors by 
descent and training, and appointed ‘good citizens’’ in their places. 
In the last war we won at sea; or, at all events, our victory was made 
easier because we were fighting a machine-made personnel in whose veins 


RECAPITULATION 299 


ran no sea-heredity, placed in ships under military discipline and called 
seamen, with leaders whose strategy was governed by a regard for trickery 
and cunning, rather than by sound principles. In both these fights for 
existence, separated from each other by one hundred years, we had on our 
side the priceless gift of sea-heredity, the sinew that strengthens the 
fibre of the nation and which has been augmented generation by generation. 

We won the War, not of ourselves, but by virtue of that vast procession 
of seamen and sea-fighters, from the forerunners of Hubert de Burgh 
down to our own fathers, men of the Royal Navy, the merchant traders, 
the fishermen, whose sea-blood has been transmitted to us through male 
and female forebears. It is this bestowal of sea instinct, by heredity from 
our sea-folk of the past centuries, that is the sure shield of our Empire 
against all assailants on the sea. 


L’ENVOI 


Slowly from the rough material, novel ships with half-trained crews, 
Knowledge came through yet untrodden unaccustomed avenues, 
Work of days and nights was blended by hard toil’s cementing force, 
Unforeseen and complex problems, yielding to combined resource. 
Scores of workers, stern endeavours, forged a weapon for the war, 
For the special operations never entered on before. 

Thus the fighting force at Dover, grew to manhood from its birth, 
Waiting for the time when proudly it would show the world its worth, 
Long patrols of German harbours, chance encounters, fed the flame 
Of impatient ardent longings for the day of greater fame. 

Through our many disappointments steadfastly we waited on, 
Confident the day we hoped for surely would arrive anon, 

Fortune’s change at length afforded us the chance we long had sought, 
All our labours, all experience, all our energy and thought, 

Of near three full years were moulded into serried mightiness, 
Contemplating, planning only thorough whole complete success. 
While the days were passing slowly waiting for the chosen hour, 
While in fervent expectation with accumulating power, 

Came a voice from one above me, and these words in accents low, 

‘* | have passed to one the weapon, his it is to strike the blow.” 
Reeled the brain in dull amazement, Was then all this labour vain ? 
Could man merely by appointment, suddenly experience gain ? 

Could the few short weeks remaining teach the lessons of three years, 
Local ignorance supplanting knowledge gained by pioneers ? 
Gradually with grasp relaxing tension of the muscles o’er, 

Hand relinquished all they fashioned, all that future held in store. 
Turning bade with full forebodings farewell to that comrade band ; 
Then in silence left the weapon to an unaccustomed hand 


300 


301 


APPENDIX I 


gifs Lr 6'z1 uoyIWeEy MH’ “YT 


LrLz1 | gr11'Lz syoolg uyof 7] 
grirz | 9161 “9 queydyO “7 “5 "H “Wop 
‘uorso[dxo 
suru Aq paltry Si°z1'6z sweITIM “H “OD “A “Wop 
serve uOs}eqIyy *N *f VT 
Sr1-z1°6z brezre surAy “YD ‘YW “Wog 
br°11°6z I@H epy ‘HVT $161 “3ny sutyt 4 
LVI! uosurydoyy “4 “FT 
"uorso]dxo 
our Aq pay | = 4 1g'bz Lr9'h SIM, “SMD “W0D-"7T 
Lr'b9 psojpueg *H “MA “WOD-"¥T 
Lirt'9 Sr‘voz | slaquiey)-puowwerpy “y “g “Fy “WOd-"7TJ Lrg'bz | v161 ‘dny 40140 J, 
grLf1 | Lrrrof poomiy “TJ “AD ‘yT 
Lr1r0f Lr°f-g1 WH-A190I9 “TFT 
Lrf-g1 QI'g'Iz yeqdues -y “J “A “wWoD 
S119 preuleg “yy “JA “WOd-"7T v161 ‘any usmDAvG) 
gifzz preulog “y “JAI “WoD 
g1‘1°61 S1'g°fz Haye] 
S1-g°fz $1°1°0z IIIZOP “OC “WA “YT 
S1°r'0z Tepung -q@‘g‘wog | gr'rigz | #161 “sny uviqnN] 
‘drys oq | ac “130YO ; : 
rene usyM fe poeta Zurpuvurw0s jO oweNY pue yuEY | all | aa | | ors 


4161 QNV 9161 ONIUNG IOULVd UAAOd AHL NI STASSAA 


VTILLOTA HLXIS IVNIDIMO JHL JO SLVOd-OdadNOL GNV SUAAOULSAAG 
I XIGNaddV | 


THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


302 


‘SyIEWIDY 


i'r 
iroo! 
QUii'ii 
S1°z1'gz 
$161 ‘3ny 
S1g'St 
SrbLz 


Lr‘Loz 

L1'Lg 
Lre1r 
S1°z1°g 
S1°9°gz 


Lr'g'1z 
g1°6°61 


Lr'z1'gz 
Lr'1'bz 


Si-L1e 
gr'ri'tz 
$1691 
g1°S'6z 


‘drys 12] 


usy AM 938q 


QIerer 
Lr'S't 
QUii'rr 
S1'z1'6z 
S1'g'or 
S1°g'S1 
Sr'-Lz 
$161 Ajnf 
Er'ert 
Q161 ‘Ivy 
Lirl'g 
Lreur 
greg 
S1°g'gz 
Tres 
git-6z 
L1‘Loz 
g1°6°61 
brS'1 
Lrz1'9z 
L161 ‘sey 
Srrz1'g 
Sr°Z'r1e 
b161 judy 
$1119 
b1°6'9 
br'6'z 
gi'S-of 
L1'g'0z 
*‘qUuoW 
-jurodde 
jo 23eq 


MAISD ‘OL yT 

uosuyof *y ‘f ‘yT 
opeprey “"] “q “WOD 
suraqd “YD “YU “A “Woy 
swer “H “OD “A “WoD 
sasuidoy “PY ‘Yy “WOoD 
[JPMXBTAY ST LL “W0d)-"vTJ 
sqqixyn *d “'T *D *wo)-"7T 
aspliqpoo, “H *[ ‘Wo 


QI00JI ‘Cl “a "YW ‘WOD-"77] 


uosng1aq “y °yT 
wowue]-3105 “gq “YH “WOD-"7T 
reAJoH *[ *d (*p324) “wWO0D-"9] 
oat “AM VT 

vosteHy OD YI 

SPAOD “TI *f “97 

uosng13,q *I] 

UILIeM “TD ‘YT 

yueydyo “5 “TH “Wop 
WH “I ‘f° ‘37 

38H LA I 

[RPAtoIod *d “Yd ‘¥I 

dno1y, “yy ysnqzy ‘7T 

Aaquvig “y puowpy ‘J 
ayoolg uyof ‘yT 

Tusig ‘O ‘qd "J ‘WoD-"7T 
9Psey *S "M “WOr)-"FT 
Aeuuepy ‘yy *4) ‘VT 

youwey “fH FT 


‘IDWO 
Suripuewwo7 jo swexNY pue yury 


| cl | | ‘pourof 


v161 ‘3ny 


v161 ‘3ny 


v161 “Sny 


v161 “Sny 


F161 ‘any 
Lrl-z 


soposn.sy) 


yIDSS0') 


393 


APPENDIX I 


"YOKE Ur Party] 


‘UORNde Ul party 


“Jauosid usyey. 


Lrfg1 
gridr 
Sv7r 


Cr°6°+1 
grit 
gi‘f"9 
Crv-0z 
S16 


g1'h'g 


Sr°g'St 


LZrrr1e 
Sr'g'fz 


grz' v1 
S1°L:9z 


Lrf-g1 
g1°1'6 
S1'¥°6 

bry v1 
gt'g9'S 

S641 


wI°zZ 
QI'g’t 
gi't'9 
Crv-oz 
Crhv6 


¥161 sunf 


gi'L9z 
gr hz 
Sigh 


zZ1°01'6z 


grb'g 
Srg'St 
rez 
Lyre 
grb 
breeze 
Prez'gr 
breze 


gr°f9 
Sr°L-9z 


WN'Y ‘wosurqoy “MM “J 
WH -A1992- “J 


uosuyof “WW “Y ° 

99A0g -2quIOI[OO MA “Z) ° 
dosHaq]!D “WW " 
aofog-IqUuIODTOOM “Dd ° 
ONY “9]0348FT “HH * 
4oorgezyH *D° 
seynbiey ‘N *D ° 
uo}JURM "O° 

"UN “9499977 “N° 
uosq!) “HV 


fechetrbete beet ee 


4] 
JouuA¥S "MM 
A[MOg “MA “a ° 


‘YT 


Josutdo-) “Fy “Y “woD 


AMM ‘dD “H 


‘YT 


WApeag °S “H “WOD-"7T 


I®H tepy ‘d‘H 
AjAeg *M “Y 
UImMO “TT 


‘YI 
‘YI 
IY 


Moe “AA “ “WO 


sdA0g-dqUIOIIOOM “SD *H 
UvUTyorg eed “dH 


‘YI 
vT 


uospseyory “MY WOD-"VT 


QUILYZ | 


QI°o1'gz 


yung 


gre 


greeer 


grees 


$161 yung 


Lrzg 
WZUNS 


161° 


$161 ° 


$161 ° 


4161 ° 


+161 ° 


4161 ° 
+161 ° 


161° 


&sdsxy 


ecto 


Dysnyy) 


WN'U “DPM 'H YT 


guirbz | v161 ‘any as s0YIIDY 


Lrf°9z 


sloquieq. puowwery g “TY ‘WOD-"7] yung | b161 ‘3ny uoprust jy 


THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


304 


WN “Agmed “Vy 3T 


eating ‘d ‘Yd ‘VI grd-1 | b161 ‘3ny prwu.sayyy 
WN Wosp “d “Vv 3T 
WN ‘Bunox ‘d H YW J 
siaky “qf “YT 
193S91JOJ "PT YJ 
uoswmmOyy, *S °O ‘YI 
dopung "{°*M ‘IT | grirbz | $161 ‘any uIa7T 
WN’ ‘PPysuepl “qd "3T 
19swwoy “Fey | grrrcyz | v161 ‘any OOLDSUD YY 
WN “UAI *M FT 
WN WOspy ‘d “V "FT 
yooigeze[y) *D *a “YI 
sisjeg *[ ‘yf ‘y] 
Jopued “A “A “¥T] 
Osea “TAA “WOD-"77 gr°f°6z | b161 ‘any punoyfk2s5 


Surpueuro; jo sWeNY pus quURY | “YJ | poutof | drys 


395 


APPENDIX I 


grirbz 


Lrrro0f 
gr'6'z 
cry St 


CrS-rr 
cree’ 


Lrz1'gz 


grzrs 
gril 
grrr 


Lr‘g'0z 
grz'ci 
Sreiurvi 


LrL'gt 
L1°1°62 
grist 
QUrirr 


Sr°g‘or 


grirbz 


Lr110f 
91°61 
Crvs 


S161 rey 


S761 
SrS-11 
Sree 
$1761 
Lrz1'gz 
LrgSz 
Lyre 
grL1f 
gril 


Zur 
Lrirvz 
gr°f-61 
grzr's 
Creu vr 


LrL'91 
Lr'r0z 
grist 
QUir'rt 
Srg'or 


neqdurey “WD FT 


ADIM “G “H “FT 

uosuyof “> °M '3T 

WI OD ‘dW ‘FI 
uosseynbiey “yy “SY YT 
JOWIUOW ‘N “A ‘YT 
weqoy °D “A ‘_ “W0D-77] 
ssuloH “a ‘YF 

LMYIS *D ‘yf WOD-"7T 
SUCUIPY “Y “OD “WOD-"77T 
[PUNT “Nd ‘yI 

TH “H‘{°O ‘v1 
MVNA *S ‘Cd “FT 
uosuyof ‘WY A ‘YT 
SLUIEH IA “AU FT 
Jaxog ‘d ‘H ‘YI 

UIP[OH “"S °D IT 

WNW Sysuy “AA “VY FT 
"UN Y SMeprey “Ss “H ‘VT 
uosuyof "WY ‘A ‘YT 
WeYBID *S “A ‘YT 
JIUIALIOG “T ‘gd ‘"H *Ww07)-"IT 
Avpyyey “Dy 

uosngioj “Y “¥] 

UIAT] “SI "MA “WOD 

Joyeg “IT 

aepre_ “y “gq “Wop 
SUIT “HO ‘A “Wop 


Lr°1'gz 
UNS 


QUIIvI 
Sri’ 


QI'I1'gz 


Qriryz 


greSz 
gr°t-Sz 


v161 ‘3ny 


v161 ‘dny 


ar 
13/014 
49y1Udg 


a4) 


Digitized by Google 


397 


APPENDIX II 


Qrror'ry UStn “y ‘v7 Lrvy QIi1'iz apvosnqupy 
Aay-isdoo0g “9d *q “y “woD-"7T Lit-+ QI'z1'z (yup 
weyesy “AO ‘VT Lrt'g QI'z1'z 404914 
*uoT}OR 
UI perry QVirez JoAMOG *S) “Y “FT 
Lre-Li 
QIi1'zz Aeqqy ‘NL ‘VW ‘YT yung QI'i1'iz uosvs0g 
g161 Ae yey] “q ‘5 “wog Lrfg QI'iI'iz asiog4og 
griror wspy WS "I FI 
QI'i1'o1 UW *¥T Lrfg gror'of suindvT 
QIir'z 21132g “OD ‘VT 
QIii'z WYSIIAA “WOD-"}'J Lrzbz gro1'of xUuaYy 
$161 b161 jauruas 
WouIey *N *H “Wo $161 b161 143189407 
sUOIspE *‘O “| “WoD $161 v161 aanjuaappy 
Lrirz Teqdury “9°45 ‘13deg 
Zrrrz | L161 “rep IIPPIy “Wo 
gi‘z1'Sz 331g “AM *N ‘wo | 4161 ‘aon grzr'Sz Inn IP 
L161 “Ie 31331g “MN “Wwo9 
uosuyof ‘gq “9 "3de9 grb Sz b161 aanuayipy 
“drys ae 
Ie] eG ~juodde "J20YO Surpuvurwoy jo owen] pue yury "yT “poutof “drys 
jo aeg 


4161 GNV ‘9161 ‘S161 NI TOULVd UFAOd AHL NI STASSAA 


TOULVd FHL OL GHYHOVLLVY SYaSINYO AUNV 


II XIQGNHddV 


‘ 


VITILLOTA HLXIS JHL GaNIO[ HOIHM SUOLINOW W GNV ‘SLVOd d ‘SYTAOULSAG 


THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


308 


1D Oe 4 uopur’y *f 'y "Wwod-"7] Liz'gi 40]U9 A 
gi'b6 osousury *H *D ‘97 
Lrrgi JNUIDY “HG ‘YT Lr fr auouodyayyy 
Lr'z1'gz UOSME'T “HD “4D “WOD-"7] 
Ly6z1 ayooig ‘f ‘woD-"7] 
Lr'g'0z UIAJ] “CI “MA “WOD 
L11'gt uosuTyIIN *D “VW “D ‘FT Lrt's fusop 
L161 ‘3 fay-3edo0g *d *q “YY “W0D-"7T L1'b°6 ssaYynD YY 
Lr-L'g psospurg “HM “WOD-"3T 
bri1'bz pseMmopy “AA “YY “WOD LrS-1 playfsuvpy 
Li'z1'°gz awey La ‘y¥I 
Lr°z1'gz Lrv'9 sJoquivy-)-puowwrepy “g “HY “WOoD L1°S'g Aquvyy 
Lr°z1'gz sJoquivy)-puowweEpy “Gg “HY “Wop 
Lrzriz UoIIW “JAI “4 “WOD-"V] “Py 
Lyrz1'0z 2P2Yy “IA “AT “UW “WOD 
L1°6'6z AQUMEPALT “AM OD “WOD Lrir'tz quapts J, 
Lr'11°9 pivusog “yy ‘JA “WoD Lriri 7uUDS0ULAI J, 
Lr'z1'0z PAY “IW AT “YW “Weg 
Lizroz | 161 judy splemMpy “YT “9 “wog gro tz LrS-¥ pyl0g 
Aqreg ‘gd 3S “Y “Wog grrz Lr6'S1 yafuaduay 
Lyr7ri yeqdwes *y “JT “A “WOD git-zz Li'g'9z UDULSYAD AT 
gi'11°6z aueqcHO "T'°D) ‘H “wo g1°6°61 grzrie 4O0UYIND J 
LrorSz Aeswrey “Py “gq “wood 
grzrd sUurAy “YD “YA “WON grzirl ayoagy 
Lror'! ZOIPIWY “yy “WOd 
Lror'r g1°6°6z : 929g “I “yW “wog 
gi'l9 | $161 -‘sny saBuidoy “Py “yy ‘WwoD grirSz | $161 jo pug ifims 
gror'Sz 2004 *S) “J “WOD-"7T giz’ gri1'Lz ado] 
g1'6'0f Poy “IAL “A.T “YW “Wo grzi'l grir'lz uly AD IAT 
-drys *quow 
yey 2eq a ‘Ja0IBO Surpuewuswoy jo sweNy pue yury | ‘WPT | “pourof | “drys 
jo eq 


309 


APPENDIX II 


Lr‘g'0z 
Lrs-+ 


Lyser 


Livi 


Lrerrr 


Lr‘g°'0z 
Lrs'+ 
Srxir€ 
LrSz 


Lymer 


Lrrgr 
Lrerir 


LrS-z1 
Gr°t°6 


Lr7e 


Liv br 
Srz1g 

LrL-9 
Lrg fr 
L£r°f-o1 


L161 Kew 
gref'1 
gree-r 

Lr1rg 
brie’ 
Lrrvz 
Lyrirrt 

L161 ‘rey 

Lrs-¢ 

Lue 
Lrf-g1 
L161 Ae 
Lr'1'6z 


uosuyof "Wl 'Y ‘f “WoD-"7] 
UIAT] “AA “WIOD 

INI] XOUY “WOD-"7T 
osu0X *Y “Y “W0D-"77] 

| [IPMAS2IZD “SD “VT 
puowyes “D "VM “FT 
oyi0x Tf HT 
qowUlg “FH “y] 

Asounel yy *f *y7T 
uosTuad] "S *D “WOD-"7] 
weqgoy °D “A yf “WOD-"77 
PuowyeEs "D “VY “MA ‘YT 
[JOMSIID °5) “FT 

JI9}S10.J ote Hy ‘H “WOT 
YoOnqi9yNI_ “yf ‘Woy 

U0 WUPT-II0L) “WOD-"7] 
use “"T Ans) ‘yT 
gepsey “T “q “wWoD 


reA[9H “2D “SI “WOD-"7] 
reAjoH “{ “dq “W0D-"7] 
woyrurepy-opduréapeql “5° “yT 
AdIM “Ef “H “FT 

suo *L, “H “Wop 
TeADIeg “d “YU “d “WoD-"¥T 
TApesg *S "H “WOD-"9T 
92d “H ‘OD ‘FT 

Amqung "y ‘J, °“Q “Wop 
UEWYOH “yf youl “yT 
Teqdurey “y “T “A “WoD 
Ja\SOLIO “Fy “WOd-"7TJ 
UIAJT “Cl “MA “UOD) 


grortz 
QI°r‘or 


Lrt'r 


Lr€°S 


Lres 
Lrt"1 


Lr°f-g1 
Lre's 


Lr°¢°S 
Lrl1 


Lrvor 
LrS-of 
Lre's 


Lr9°S 
Lrt'1 
Lrf-bz 
Lrvr 
Lr°S-gz 


Lrvoft 
Lrzvz 


THE CONCISE STORY OF THE DOVER PATROL 


310 


grory 
g1'6'S 


gry 
Lrrrzz 


Qriz'1 
Lrevy 
LrorSz 
Lr L-gz 


gr'6:L1 
g1°S°61 


1'f-0z 

gr61 inf 
gr‘or: 

gr6'S 


QUIIOI 
gry'g 


LV1r7z 
gi'b'of 


grt’s 
grS-of 
U2'r 
£1-6:9 
Lrey 
QI°z'gI 
Lror'$z 
S1'g'9z 
LiLbz 
gr'6°L1 
gr°S‘or 


x09 ‘dD ‘WT 
pusjog “Yy “f 37 

uox/qUING “Y “MA ‘YT 

Wr DS ‘WOs[aIA “d Y "W0)-"I'] 
WN ‘aquing y ‘H "Uwl07)-"'T 
UN'S ‘epoutg “7 “fT 
oping “V ‘dd ‘FT 

MEY IT 

osolsury “H *D ‘IT 

Teqduey “Ty “Sy “FT 

auoisapig “J ‘[ °D ‘¥] 

sayy yey “37 

WNW ‘J2suNGg H “MA IT 
seUOy ].-UBAg “J *D “FT 

JIA "H) “WO)-3T 

ouieg “JAI ‘WO 

UPN “VV “WOD 

UBMOZ) "W0D-"3T 

WISMET “D “VY “WOD-"¥T 
Avsurey “HY “{ “WOD 

Au3idseiz ap “gq °C “wOodD 
P10yINY *S “d “WOD-3T 

SPsED “D “AA “WOD 

TeqdureD *y “T “A “WoD 

uyof 3g °C ‘WOD-"FT 

weqind “Fd “Vv ‘YT 

uemAieg “MAYO FT 
yaiden] WosuTEN TIM “Al “FT 


‘I29YO Burpueurwo, jo surenNy pue yury | 


grfof 

gig 

gi°foz 

Qriimsz 

Lrt-zz 

grers Lrl-tr 

grzrs grf-6z 

6rr'r gre br 

QIir'gt gr'6'bz 

QUZrir Sr°r1'g 

6rr’ Sr‘or'61 

grd-tz $169 

6rr°€ Srord 

grl-zz L1°9°9 

Lret-tz 

yung Lrt-S 

Lr S-Lz L£1'£°6 

Lrgz Creer 
"YrT | "poutof | 


311 


APPENDIX II 


Lrviir'! 
QI'g'z1 


grS'of 
Lyverir 
Lr for 
grog 


greLez1 
grS-z1 


grs'y 
Lrrrof 
Lrrvi 


oSpuymeyy “MA “FT 
uosurydoyy “4 °7] 
POJpuLG *MA “WOD-"3T 
WW "Wl ‘fT 
nods "AAV ‘FT 
Avuuey *5 °] 
uBUIyOH *S “[ “FT 
J23820AFJ “YMA “IT 
ULAJOD “A “] “FT 


"weg ‘opawuog ‘f mg ‘7] 


WOMM “VM VT 
pseeg LO ‘¥I 

MAlOD *O “{ (FT 

BIBID) “WOD-"FT 

wey “AY YY] 
Asounef *yy *f °3T 
JOAvg “JAI 3] 

IY Od ‘WY 
poomiy "J “4° I] 
uopury ‘f ‘y ‘woD-"7] 


$9999S “WA “O “WO 


grzry 
Lr°9°6z 


gr11'61 


gr°1°6z 
g1'g'Lz 


gig bz 
QI'Q'1z 


QI°z'gz 
gre'1 


gr'2'g 


LrorS1 


vq 


IZq 


Id 
IZW 


Digitized by Google 


APPENDIX III 


NAMES OF MASTERS OF CROSS-CHANNEL TRANSPORTS 


Invicta 

Onward 

Queen Victoria 
Princess Victoria 
Golden Eagle 
Arundel 

Princess Henriette 


Princess Clementine 


St. David 
St. Andrew 
St. Patrick 
Newhaven 
Brighton 


Dieppe 

Stad Antwerpen 
FJanbreydel 
Princess Elizabeth 
Pieter de Contnck 
Ville de Liege 

St. Dents 

Angha 


G. Hancock, R. Carey, C. Cobb, W. Oates. 

W. Morrison, H. Emery, J. Harrison. 

(These masters were interchangeable between the ships.) 
A. Blaxland. 

F. J. Adams. 


C. Cook. 

H. Shortt, followed later by A. Hill. 

S. Marmery, followed later by H. Shortt. 
Act. Com. Belgian Marine R. Ryez. 


” 99 99 E. Timmermans. 


mr ‘5 se A. Grayett. 
it ‘a - H. de House. 
99 9? 99 if Rohaert. 
S. Smy. 
L. Manning. 


313 


Digitized by Google 


INDEX 


A 


Aboukir, H.M.S., 136 

Abuse, Admiral subjected to, 109 

Acceptable, drifter, 123 

Active, H.M.S., 57 

Admiral, place of, in offence and defence, 120 

Admiralty issue incorrect information re 
brugge attack, 230 

Admiralty Committee interference with the 
Command, 68, 161, 162, 163, 167 

Adventure, H.M.S., 57 

Afridi, H.M.S., 141, 177 

Air attacks, 112 

Airmen, reasonable treatment of, 288 

Airships, S.S., 287 

Ajax II, drifter, 180 

Alaburn, drifter, 176 

Albyn, P.M.S., 81 

Alert: 


Trinity House vessel, 139 

loss of, 155 
Allied Army, protection of left flank, 44, 234 
Altham, Commander Edward, 56 
Amazon, H.M.S., 41, 121, 143 
Anglia, 2d ship, loss of, 74, 77 
A pollo, H.M.S., 207 
Arctic, kite balloon, 58 
Argus, Trinity House vessel, 139 
Aries, yacht, loss of, 174 
Arndtily Castle, drifter, 139, 176 
Arrogant, H.M.S., 59 
Athlone, Earl of. See Teck, Duke of 
Attacks to help Army, feigned, 102, 104 
Attentive, H.M.S., 57, 100, 136 
Aw Fast, drifter, 141, 178 
Aventurter, French destroyer, 237 


B 


Bainbridge, Lieutenant R. S., 79 
Bairnsfather, Captain G., 97 
Balfourier, General, 235 
Ballard, Read-Admiral George, 28 
Balmoral, P.M.S., 280 
Barbier, Colonel, 235 
Barnes, Lieutenant, 78 
Barrage : 
Belgian Coast, 1916 rapidity of laying, 177 
Belgian Coast, 1917 rapidity of laying, 181 
Goodwin-Snou, its w points, 154 
Goodwin-Snou, lighting of discussed, 155 
Goodwin-Snou, attack on, 179 
Folkestone and Gris-Nez, attack on, 166 
Dee re ae re nee Sunt ubee ceernoyoe 
» 100, 167 
Barrage Committee, disastrous effect on work of 
Patrol, 161, 162, 163, 167 
-Command 


Barrow, Lieutenant er B., 131 


Bart, Jean, 21 et seq. 
Batteries, uselessness of attack on, 266 
sean e EP apal janie of, 22 
ec per James, 173 
Beedle, eutenant, 77 
Begonia, drifter, 173 
Belgian Coast: 
attack on, by Germans possible, 44 
effect of, its retention by Germans, 293 
patrol line, typical day, 147 
patrol line, work effected by, 142 
retention of enemy’s troops on, 102, 105 
second barrage laid, 143 
survey by photography, 186 
Belgians, H.M. the King of, 235, 282 
danger of being kidnapped, 236 
Belgians, H.M. Queen of, 235, 282 
Bell-Irving, Lieutenant Hi. B., 181 
Benn, Commander Hamilton, 58 
Benwell, Captain, 234 
Biarittz, minelaying ship, 139 
Bickford, Brigadier-General, 241 
Bickford, Commander, 33, 238 
Bigot, Commandant, 236 
Bigsworth, Flight-Commander, 277 
Bird, Captain F., 100, 337, 154, 169, 172, 374 
Blake, Captain J. T., 97 
Blockade, comparison 1805, 1915, 36 
Blocking : 
Belgian ports, reasons against, 209, 213 
French ports, possibility of, 211 
method of clearing, 212 
Ostend plans for, in 1915, 208 
Ostend and Zeebrugge, impossibility of, 209 
Blount, Commander R., 32, 55 
Bombardment : 
arrangements for, by vessels on patrol, 99, 109 
difficulties caused by Press comments, 106 
delays in, 107-10 
of batteries by ships, uselessness of, 266 
of Bruges, arranged for, 217 
of Ostend, June 1917, 109 
of Ostend, September 1917, 110 
preparations for, 259 
of Zeebrugge, September 1916, 100, 102 
of Zeebrugge, May 1917, 105-108 
Bombs : 
dropped weight of, 287 
scarcity of, 276 
serie 4 Lieutenant-Commander, 174 
Botha, H.M.S., 236, 268 
Boucher, French destroyer, 236 
Ss 1e : 


Lieutenant-Commander 
See Woolcombe Boyce 
Branlebas, French destroyer, 237 


35 


316 


Bridge, Skipper Charles, 178 
Bridges, Major-General Tom, 235 
Brighton Queen, loss of, 
Broke, H.M.S., 57, 111, 116, 126, 143, 156 
Bromet, Squadron Commander, 283 
Brown, ‘Commander John, 58 
Bruges : 

becomes a base, rrr 

arranged to bombard with 18-inch gun, Irr 
Bruton, Captain C. W., 56 
Bustard, H.M.S., 59 


C 


Campbell, Lieutenant H. G., 222 
Campbell, Commander Victor, 1§3 
Canterbury, H.M.S., 125 

Capitaine Mehl, French aie daa 132, 236 
Carson, Right Hon. Sir E., 106 

Carter, Commander Norman, 56, 101 
Casualties at Zeebrugge, 223 

Caswell, Lieutenant, 238 

Caulder, Lieutenant-Commander, 175 
Censors, special, for great landing, 19! 
Chain Sweeping, 72 

Chrsyanthemum, drifter, 176 

Churchill, Right Hon. Winston, 29, 357, 166, 275 
City of Dundee, trawler, 78 

City of Oxford, kite balloon ship, 58 

Clarke, Able Seaman Sidney, 127 

Clayton, Flight Sub-Lieutenant, 280 
Cleopatra, H.M.S., 141 

Clive, Lord. See Lord Clive 

Clover Bank, drifter, 140, 170, 176 

Coastal motor boats, discrimination in use of, 


24 

Coles, "i ieutenaut: 78 
Collard, Captain B: St. G., 56 
Conby, Lieutenant, 174; 181 
Conqueror, tug, 191 
Conrad, Joseph, 8 
Cook, Skipper A. E., 181 
Cordner, Major A. A., 222 
Cosmos, drifter, 177 
Cradock, Rear-Admiral, 298 
Crafter, ‘Lieutenant, 173 
Crampton, Brigadier-General, 241 
Craufurd. See General Craufurd 
Cressy, H.MLS., 136 
Critics, 120, 157 
Cross-Channel traffic: 

protection of, 85 

open to day destroyers’ attack, 86 
Cross-Channel : 

double sailings arranged for, 86 

sailings missed, 87 

table of sailings, 90 

mine-fields affecting, 92 

troops passed, 92 
Cunningham, Lieutenant, 60, 287 


D 


Dagon, trawler, 77 
Dampier, Rear-Admiral C. F., 240 
Dance Class, paddle-mine-sweepers, 59 
Dangerous rd 

number of, 7 

reduction ie 1918, 76 
Daniels, Lieutenant, 81 
Datum, ‘drifter, 180 


Davidson, Skipper William, 373 


INDEX 


De Burgh, Hubert, Lieutenant-Commander, 140 
De Burgh, 19 
Decision, rapid necessity for, 267, 269 
De Curzon, Enseign de Vaisseau, 237 
De Marliave, Rear-Admiral, 103, 142, 232, 233 
De Peyronnet, Enseign de Vaisseau, 237 
De Ruyter, Admiral, 20 
Destroyers : 
British inferior numbers, 41, 136 
Dover routine of, 114 
disposition of, 130 
escort by, 85 
inferior gun eT, 41, 117 
inferior s , 118 
necessity for being at the ready, 85 
effect of wash, 109, 145, 267 
German bad tactics of, 118 
German raids by, 121-130 
German superior range of guns, 116 
use of torpedoes, 117 
laying long line of ao 345 
shortage of, reason for, 116 
variation of speed in shallow water, 108 
use of, discussed, 119 
De Tourville, Count, 22 
Devon County, drifter, 1 174 
D’Eyncourt, Sir Tennyson, 61, 188, 258 
Diane, yacht, 139, 176 
Diggle, Commander Neston, 57 
District Naval Transport Officers, 97 
Donovan, Lieutenant, 238, 239 
Dover Area: 
difficulties of, 39 
extent of, 39 
number of vessels passing through, 76 
vital interests of, 40 
Drifter crews : 
at Zeebrugge 1: of, 123, 180 
at rugge 1915, 172 
Drifters 
Dover. attack on, 1916, 179 
Dover attack on, 1918, 166 
Drift nets, description of, 170 
Dunkirk Aerodrome, attack on, 280 
Dunkirk, closing of jocks at night, 73 


E 


E 52, submarine, sinks German submarine, 156 
East Briton oe 174, 176 

E.B.C., drifter, 

Edwards, Cannan P. H., 221, 268 

E.E.S., trawler, 1977 

Eplington Lieutenant W. E., 77 

Eldri Commander G. B., 153 

Electra II, trawler, 78 

Electrically controlled boat, description of, 144 

Elkington, Mr. V., 241 

Elliot, Lieutenant-Colonel B. H., 221 

Enseign Rouz, French destroyer, 236 

Equinoz, trawler, 

Erebus, H.M.S., - +» 54, 56, 105-306, 109-111, 144, 


196 
attack on, by electrically controlled boat, 145 
d, French 


» 236 
Etotle Polaire, trawier, 7 
Eugene. See Prince Eugene 


EvaSs, the Monks 1 R. G. R., 32, 46, 50, 553; 57, 


127 
Evans, Sub-Lieutenant, 174 
Excellent, 


H.M.S., 59 


INDEX 


F 


Falmouth III, trawler, 77 

Farley, Mr., Mayor of Dover, 245 

Faulkner, H.M. S., 57 

Favereau, Vice-Admiral, 232 

Fearless, drifter, 103, 173 

Ferrand, Flight Sub-Lieutenant, 279 

Fisher, A al of the Fleet, Lord, 29, 116, 298 
Flares, used on poet we barrage, 165 

Flint, Major Charles, 238 

Flirt, H.M.S., 121, 122, 180 

Foch, Maresc 235 

Fowler, H,, Seaman, 127 

Fraser, Commander J. S., 33 

Frederick the Great, 255 

French Coast, . protection of, 233 

French, Field-Marshal Viscount 29, 102, 193, 


French’ torpedo-boats, 36 
Furness, Sub-Lieutenant, 139 


G 
G 42, 129 
G 85, 129 
Garnett, Commander Herbert, 57 
Gask, Fleet- Paymaster Walter, 32 
Gatwick, P M. S., 81 
Gayer, cap tain, German Navy, 155, 156 
Geddes, Right Hon. Sir Eric, 158, 227 
General Craufurd, H.M.S., 56, 102, 105, 173, 192 
at Zeebrugge, 104 
General Wolfe, H ™. S., 56, 339, 192 
George V, drifter, 181 
Ghurka, H.M.S., 79, 132 
Gibbs, Commander Valentine, 140, 222 
Gibson, R. H., 7 
Girl Annie, drifter, 260 
Gladstone, Commander Edward, 57 
Gleaner of the Sea, drifter, 139, 176, 180 
ees eens 173 
ope, 298 
Coe, Lieutenant Observer, 108 
Graham, Flight Sub-Lieutenant B., 279 
Grant, Captain C33 
Grant, Reee Admiral eathcote, 240 
Great Heart, drifter, 173 
Greypoint, 8.S., 125 
Gun, 18-inch, monitors fitted with, 297 
Gush, Commander H. W., 97 
Gu , Capitaine de Frégate, 236 
Gy es, Donald, Midshipman, 127 


H 


Haig, Field-Marshal Earl, 104, 105, 284, 188, 
203, 204, 214, 284, 294 

Halahan, Captain H., aan 229, 235, 237 

Hamilton , Captain F.W +» 234 

caer defence in war, sensible procedure for, 


Harland, Lieutenant, 177 

Harrison, Lieutenant-Commander H. L., 223 
Hazard, H. M.S., 57 

H. E. Stroud, trawler, 77, 78, 121, 180 

Hely d’Oisel, General, 235 

Henderson, Captain Arnot, 240 

Hercus, Lieutenant E. D., 33 

Herring Searcher, drifter, 173 

Hindenburg battery, 10! 

Hoban, Wardroom Steward, 81 


King, 
_ King, Lieutenant-Co 


317 


Hogue, H.M.S., 

Hood, Rear- rep Hon. H., 28, 29, 30, 237 
Houth, Sub-Lieutenant, 132 

Howard, Captain Vansittart, 32, 64, 75 

Hull Trader, s.s., 78 

Hunter-Weston, BEsjor“oouera! Sir A., 209 
Hurren, Skipper, 176 

Hyacinth, drifter, 103, 173 


I 


Important personages, precautions regarding, 93 
Ince, Sub-Lieutenant Observer, 279 
Irts II, 222 
Iron, Captain, Jona, vi 
ships oe Bed tevite 
Irving. 


J 


Jackson, Admiral of the Fleet Sir H., 64, 138, 
207 
James Fletcher, trawler, 1 
Jellicoe, Admiral of the “eet Viscount, rrz, 
158, 161, 162, 163, 188, 204, 213, 218, 227 
John Moore. See Sir John "Moore 
ohn Roberts, drifter, 177 
ohnson, Commodore Charles, 32, 57, 140, 234 
ohnson, Flight-Lieutenant Keith, 279 


K 


Keigwin, erie R. P., R.N.V.R., 32 
Kempton, P.M.S., 
Keyes, Rear Adiniral Sir Roger, 161, 163, 166, 

223, 226, 227 
Kiddle, Commander K. -» 57 

His Majesty The, 27, 7, 237, 245, 282 

mmander, 238 
Kite Balloon, destruction of, 283 


L 


Lady Brassey, tug, 243 
Lady Crundal, tug, 243 
Laertes, H.M. S. -» 125 
Laforey, H.M.S., ay 


patie Ca De Wine Fa asa 
ing- Capt ed 279, 285, 289 
Landie by Germans a Beltan coast, possi- 


bility of, 
Landing feign 
pla ets 1915, 102 
apes rg ember 1916, 105 
g, chances of success, 257 
Landing, Great : 


snethod of & of islet 192 
asi od ie eis on tides, 186 
t by Commander-in-Chief, 


Lansley. woe A., 78, 79 
Lark, 125 

Launch oan ter, 180 
Laverock, H.M. S., 124 

Le Clipon, internment camp, 203 
Lewin, Commander, 79, 132 
Liberty hospital ship, 191 

Light Buoys : 

on Patrol line, 139 

on barrage, 155 


318 
Lights, navigational, necessity for maintaining, 


73 
Lillicrap, Mr., Constructor R.N., 188, 191 
Litchfield-Speer, Captain, 139 
Llewellyn, H.M.S., 124 
Lloyd, Captain Douglas Pennant, 97 
London, possible starvation of, 40 
Lord Clive, H.M.S., 56, 100, 101, 103, 105, 342, 
192, 282 
Lord Roberts, H.M.S., 189 
Lusitania, coasting vessel, 77 
Lydsard, H.M.S., 108 
Lynes, Commodore Hubert, 234 


M Class. See Monitors M Class 
McClorry, Lieutenant R. J., 77, 78 
McCullock, Commander C., 58 
Macfarlane, trawler, 78 
MacIntosh, Sub-Lieutenant W. A., 77 
Mackenzie destroys kite balloon, 282 
McLean, Captain Colin, 251 
McMullen, Colonel, 188 
Marfreen, drifter, 173 
Maginnis, Mr., Chief Constructor, 188 
Magon, French destroyer, 236 
Maguire, Lieutenant, 59 
Maidstone, Lieutenant-Commander Lord, 238 
Maloja, P. & O., loss of, 75, 77 
Man, Commander J., 97 
Maori, H.M.S., 131 
Maresceaux, Captain A. E., 234 
Marshal Ney, H.M.S., 54, 55, 102, 12%, 131, 174 
Marshal Soult, H.M.S., 54, 105, 106, 144, 196 
Mary Cowte, drifter, 176 ; 
Measurement of distance by taut wire, 189 
Meddis, A. M., Observer, R.N.A.S., 278 
Medea, H.M.S., 140 
Melpomone, H.M.S., 140 
Memorandum on chances of success of Great 
Landing, 196 
to Admiralty, re traffic control, 67 
to drifters, 188 
to Admiral Keyes by his predecessor after 
leaving the Patrol, 226 
value of seaplanes, 285 
Mencelaus, kite balloon ship, 58 
Mentor, H.M.S., 236 
Middlekerke bombardments, 105 
Mills, Flight-Lieutenant, 278 
Milne, H.M.S., 133, 140 
Mine barrage : 
Folkestone-Gris-Nez, lighting of, 159 
sooeel scheme, 160, 164 
t recommended to Admiralty, 138, 157 
Minefield : 
bluff on Belgian Coast, 137 : 
North Sea Wall advocated, 138, 157 
shallow Folkestone barrage, 159 
Mine, German, description of, 65 
Mine-laying by destroyers, 145 
Mine-nets, description of, 163 
Mines, reasons for failure of, 65 
Mine-sweepers, paddle, $9, 69, 80 
Mine sweeping : 
distances lah 64, 68 
description of, 66 
vessels, lives saved by, 82 
vessels, casualties to, 82 
Mining school, 155 
Mohawk, H.M.S., 131 
Molteno, Captain V. B., 53 


INDEX 


Morgan, 

Motor launches, lives saved by, 25! 
Mouget, t, 236 

Muir, Lieutenant, 177 

Mulock, ht Sub-Lieutenant, 281 
Murray, H.M.S., 140 

Mussel, H.M.S., 240 

Myngs, H.M.S., 125 


N 


Navigational lights, extinguishing of, 7§ 
haat Lord, 21, 23 e seg., 30, 130 f. 
ets: 


drift, description of, 169 

mines, description of, 153 
Nimrod, H.M.S., 140 
Norton, Flight Sub-Lieutenant, 283 
Notre Dame de Lourdes, 236 
Nubian, H.M.S., 122, 123, 132, 139 


oO 


Observers, special value of, 288 
Obusser, French destroyer, 141 
Oliphant, Commander Henry G., 57, 143 
Oliver, Vice-Admiral Sir Henry, 111, 158, 189, 
207, 213, 227, 255 
Ombra, yacht, 121, 180 
Operations : 
cancellation of, 263 
Committee, 158, 270, 271 
their plans for blocking Zeebrugge, 224 
latitude in orders, 268 
Oriflamme, French destroyer, 237 
Orvtetto, mine-laying ship, 138, 139 
Ostend: 
batteries protecting, 100, 104 
blocking plans for, 207 
bombardment of September 1915, 100 
bombardment of June 5th, 1917, 109 
bombardment of tember 1917, 110 
here ay eee as a base, 111 
Ostrich II, trawler, 80 
Othello II, trawler, 79 


P 


Paine, Read-Admiral Godfrey, 289 
Palmer, Commander A. R., 59 


Engineer er W., 33, 115, 240 
Paton, Captain W. D., 55 
Patrol destroyer, disposition of, 1917, 43, I15; 


130 
Peck, Commander Ambrose, 57, 127 


2a om 


INDEX 319 


Penley, ht Sub-Lieutenant, 28: 
Perststive, ter, 175 
Petre, Flight- -Lieutenant, 281 
Peyronnet, Enseign de Vaisseau, 237 
Phillips, Lieutenant-Commander P., 253 
Philpotts, Rear-Admiral, rrr 
Photographic camera mounted in aeroplane, 277 
Photographs : 

aerial height taken at, 188 

surveying by, accuracy of, 188 
Pleasant, drifter, 180 
Pontoons, evolution of the idea of, 185 
iopeted pea Maurice, 7 
Prince oe H.M iS, 56, 102, 105, 139, 173, 

174, 
Prince Rupert, H.M.S., 56, 100, rol, 105, 142, 
143, 189, 192 

Princess Mar, ei , mine-laying vessel, 137 
Prior, Mate 103, 173 
Protect, ute 181 


Q 
Queen, transport, loss of, 122 


R 


Raids by German destroyers : 

October 1916, 121 

November 1916, 123 

March 1917, 123 

April 1917, 124 
Ramsay, Mr., Dockyard Foreman, 115, 241 
Ramsgate : 

raids on, 132 

drifters, 123 
Rawlinson, Lieutenant-General Sir H., 192, 203 
Rawson, Commander H., 191 
Redcar, P.M.S., 81 
Redoubdtable, H. M. S., 53, 100, 173 
Rehearsals, points regarding, 258 
Reinhold, Ca tain H. O., 
Revenge, H. oy 
Rigg, Commander. ‘is 80 
Riviera, H.M.S., 60, 104, 276 
Roberts, Lieutenant E., 77 
Robertson, Leonard, Able Seaman, 127 
Roeburn, one 178, 180 
Rodwell, Skipper John, 175 
Ronarc’h, A » 29, 143, 233 
Rouquerol, General, 235 
Rupert, Prince. See Prince Rupert 


Ss 


Sabreur, trawler, 12 
Sailings of ae. table of, 89 
St. Germain, trawler, 79 
St. John, Lieutenant-Commander, 144 
St. Seine, Marquis de, 29 
Salvage officer : 
mine, 244 
Admiralty, 244 
Sanda, aa 102, 173 
loss of 
Saurin, Cori manied Gerald, 59 
Scarlett, Skipper, 103, 173 
Schultz, Captain Karl, German Navy, 221 
S. D. Lambert, loss of, 75 
S.D.T., drifter, 174 
Seaplanes, limitations of, 285 


Secrecy : 
-oreneant | of, in plans, 255 
ey of, 258 
Shpmates dvifter 1 
spmates, ter, 173 
Shoals, value of, in davication: 261 
Shoppee, Lieutenant, 237, 238 
Shortridge, Mr. A. D. -» 32, 240 
Signals, care necessary in wording, 260 
Sir John Moore, H.M.S., 100, 105, 174, 192, 282 


Sluys, te of, Peas 
Smart, M., ty Constnuctional es, 115 
Smyth- Pigott, Flight-Commander, 278 
Soult. See Marshall Soult 
Souter, Skipper, 176 
Spencer-Grey, ee 278 
Spencer, Commander H., 
Spotless Prince, drifter, ae 
Spotting: 

for gun fire, improvements in, 103, 104 

by aero aeroplane, 103 103 

observation stations, 99, 103 

Stark, Chief Engineer, 78 
Strathcairn, trawler, 79 
Strickland, Major-General, 192, 203 
Strouger, Skipper, 176 


Sturdee, Admiral Sir Doveton, 298 
Sturdee, Lieutenant-Comm ander L. A. D., 57 
Submarines : 


as observation stations, 253 

Dover employment of, 48, 156 

E 52, 156 

first German blown up in barrage, 181 

fitted as light-buoys, 252 

for submerged creeping, 252 

friendly, ai eae ce regarding, 266 

number sunk in day time by Folkestone 

barrage, 163 

surface attack by, 64, 68, 75 

how patrol kept free from, 114 

lost in Folkestone barrage, 116 
Sueter, Commodore Murry, 275, 289 
Surrender at night, ambiguity of, 129 
Swan, Chief Engineer, 54 
Swell caused by vessels steaming, 199 
Swift, H.M.S., 57, 116, 126, 156 


T 


Tanks, use of, in Great Landing, 191 
Taprell-Dorling, Lieutenant-Commander H., 140 
Tartar, H.M.S., 132 
Taut wire gear for measuring distances, 189 
Teck, Prince Alexander of, 235 
Tennyson, Sub-Lieutenant Hon. H., 132 
Terror, H.M.S., 54, 56, 105, 106, 109, 110, 143, 
144, 196 

torpedoed, 1 
Threlfall, Tigutenant W., 33, 57 
Thouroude, Commandant, 236 


Tides, method of gauging, 187 
Tipping, eutenant-Commander Gartside-, 103, 
173, 245 


Tirpitz battery, 54, 102 

Tomlin, Captain G. N., 32 

Torpedo, carried in German seaplanes, 181 
Toward, S.S., 174 

Tower, ‘Lieutenant, 237 


d to, 7 night, 68 
holding up, loss a eres by, 69, 70 
percentage loss of, 76 


320 


Traffic (cont.): 
protection of routes versus areas, 67 
vessels passing Dover, number of, 68 
Transports, cross-Channel : 
complaints regarding, 93 
day running, reasons for, 84 
distinguished passengers, 93 
double sailings, 86 
lying alongside Folkestone, 269 
names of Masters, Appendix III 
numbers carried by, 92 
Trawlers : 
distance swept by, 68 
losses in personnel, 82 
mine-laying by, 80 
numbers in Patrol, 70 
removal of wheel-house doors, 79 
Trenchard, General, 284 
Tribal Class destroyers, losses in, 131 
Trinity House Elder Brethren, 155 
Tripods, for observation of fire, 99, 100, 25, 257 
Troup, Lieutenant H. R., 140 
Tufnell, Lieutenant, 238 
Tunnel Class minesweepers, $9 
Tweedie, Captain Hugh, 54 
Tyrwhitt, Commodore Reginald, §9, 140, 141, 


194, 213 

U 
U 48, 156 
U B 38, 166 
U C 63 sunk by E 52, 253 
U 70, 157 
U 94, 156 

Vv 


V 609, destroyer, 222 

Vaughan-Lee, Rear-Admiral, 287 
Venerable, H.M.S., 53 

Venn, Commander George, 141, 173, 177 
Vestal, Trinity House vessel, 139 
Viking, H.M.S., 45, 54, 13% 

Vindictive, H.MSS., 221, 222 

Violet II, 175 

Volscian, S.8., 78 


INDEX 


Ww 


Wahine, mine-laying trawler, 154 

Waller, Mr. M. M., 270 

Wardell-Yerburgh, Lieutenant, 186 

Warneford, Flight Sub-Lieutenant, 278 

Waters, Skipper, 79 

Watson, Sub-Lieutenant, 174, 176 

Waverley II, drifter, 180 

Weigelin, trawler, 79 

Weight of bombs drop by aircraft, 287 

Welman, Lieutenant- er, 248 

Wemyss, Vice-Admiral Sir Rosslyn, 227 

Wi , Captain E., 56 

Williams, Commander T., 132 

Williams, Staff-Pa ter, 238 

Wills, Captain S. C., 56, 145 

Wilson, Admiral of Fleet Sir A., 171, 207, 
255, 263, 268 

Wilson, pun, Canadian E eers, 238 

Wilson, Flight-Lieutenant, 27 

Wolfe, H.M.S. See General Wolfe 

Woodhall, Commander, 97 

Woods, Second Engineer-Lieutenant, 81 


Woolcombe-Boyce, Lieutenant-Commander, 132 
Wreath at funeral of German officers, 130 


Y 
Yelverton, Rear-Admiral Bentinck, 97 


Zz 
Zeebrugge, bombardment of 1915, 100, 102 


. Zeebrugge Locks : 


visible size of, 106 
batteries at, 100, 104 
bombardment, 1916, 105-108 
Zeebrugge, casualties at Mole Landing, 223 | 
gallantry of officers and men at operation 
1918, 223 
Zeppelin, attacks on, 277 
Zero, small airship, 282 
Zubian, H.M.S., 123 
Zulu, H.M.S., 123, 132, 139 


é 


bal 


4é 


i 
ie 7 
+ 
Ce a Yi -— cafe 
~ 
: rs yi 
5 * “a te 
a 
1 a 
fF 
’ 
- ' - 7A r : 
, . 3 
' 7 . 
— 5, 
ad ' . 
i 
2 F 
¢ 
a 
. 
pemit wens ye ata 2 a 
: - 3 : 
. : ‘ 
' to - z 
_—-_~ . om cs _ 
+ .- 2 he 
4 ae - 
os * me 
s 
« ° a 
‘ ; + rg 
a 
i + 
r 
a ' 
t 
, . 
+ 
5 rie “ 
. 
_ 
41 . *, 7 
t 
a 
i i 
4 
7 we Scag a 
= a zi ar = 
~ == _ ms - 
* 7 - - 
J rts <n 


Digitized by Google 


UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 


UWA NANA 


3 9015 04979 1323 


- aeetah 


ap. tigate 

